Third
O'REILLY Edition
Head First
Android
Development
A Learner's Guide to
Building Android Apps
with Kotlin
Dawn Griffiths
& David Griffiths
A Brain-Friendly Guide
Head First Android
Development, Third Edition
Dawn Griffiths
David Griffiths
Head First Android Development
by Dawn Griffiths and David Griffiths
Copyright © 2022 David Griffiths and Dawn Griffiths. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North,
Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly Media books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles
(http://oreilly.com). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: (800) 998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com.
Series Creators: Kathy Sierra, Bert Bates
Editor: Virginia Wilson
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Production Editor: Katherine Tozer
Production Services: Charles Roumeliotis
Indexer: Potomac Indexing, LLC
Page Viewers: Mum and Dad, Rob and Lorraine
Printing History:
June 2015: First Edition.
August 2017: Second Edition.
November 2021: Third Edition.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. The
Head First series designations, Head First Android Development, and
related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish
their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear
in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of a trademark claim, the
designations have been printed in caps or initial caps.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the
publisher and the authors assume no responsibility for errors or omissions,
or for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.
No kittens were harmed in the making of this book, but several pizzas were
eaten.
ISBN: 978-1-492-07652-0
[LSI]
[2021-11-10]
To all the key workers who kept us and our loved ones safe over the past
two years. We’re immensely grateful.
Authors of Head First Android Development
Dawn Griffiths started life as a mathematician at a top UK university,
where she was awarded a first-class honors degree in mathematics. She
went on to pursue a career in software development and has over 20 years’
experience working in the IT industry as a senior software developer.
When Dawn’s not working, you’ll find her honing her Tai Chi skills,
reading, running, making bobbin lace, or cooking. She particularly enjoys
spending time with her wonderful husband, David.
David Griffiths began programming at age 12, when he saw a
documentary on the work of Seymour Papert. At age 15, he wrote an
implementation of Papert’s computer language LOGO. Since then, he has
worked as an agile coach, a software developer, and a garage attendant, but
not in that order.
When David’s not working, he spends much of his spare time traveling with
his lovely wife, Dawn.
Together, Dawn and David have written a whole host of books, including
Head First Android Development, Head First Kotlin, Head First C, Head
First Rails, Head First Statistics, and the React Cookbook. They
contributed to 97 Things Every Java Programmer Should Know, and they
created the video course The Agile Sketchpad as a way of teaching key
concepts and techniques in a way that keeps your brain active and engaged.
They also deliver live, online training through the O’Reilly learning
platform at https://www.oreilly.com/live-events.
You can follow Dawn and David on Twitter at
https://twitter.com/HeadFirstDroid.
Table of Contents (the real
thing)
How to use this book: Intro
Your brain on Android. Here you are trying to learn something,
while here your brain is, doing you a favor by making sure the
learning doesn’t stick. Your brain’s thinking, “Better leave room
for more important things, like which wild animals to avoid and
whether naked snowboarding is a bad idea.” So how do you trick
your brain into thinking that your life depends on knowing how to
develop Android apps?
1. “Who is this book for?”
2. “We know what you’re thinking”
3. “We know what your brain is thinking”
4. “Metacognition: thinking about thinking”
5. “Here’s what WE did”
6. “Read me”
7. “The truly awesome technical review team”
8. “Acknowledgments”
Chapter 1
Android is the world’s most popular mobile operating system.
And there are billions of Android users worldwide, all waiting to
download your next great idea. In this chapter, you’ll find out how
to start turning your ideas into reality by building a basic Android
app, and updating it. You’ll learn how to run it on physical and
virtual devices. Along the way, you’ll meet two of the core
components of all Android apps: activities and layouts.
1. “Welcome to Androidville”
2. “Activities and layouts form the backbone of your app”
3. “Here’s what we’re going to do”
4. “Android Studio: your development environment”
5. “Install Android Studio”
6. “Let’s build a basic app”
7. “How to build the app”
8. “Android Versions Up Close ”
9. “You’ve created your first Android project”
10. “Dissecting your new project”
11. “Introducing the key files in your project”
12. “Edit code with the Android Studio editors”
13. “The story so far”
14. “How to run the app on a physical device”
15. “How to run the app on a virtual device”
16. “Create an Android Virtual Device (AVD)”
17. “Compile, package, deploy, run”
18. “What just happened?”
19. “Let’s refine the app”
20. “What’s in the layout?”
21. “activity_main.xml has two elements”
22. “Update the text displayed in the layout”
23. “What the code does”
24. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 2
Most apps need to respond to the user in some way. And in this
chapter, you’ll see how you can make your apps more interactive.
You’ll discover how to add an OnClickListener to your activity
code so that your app can listen to what the user’s doing, and
make an appropriate response. You’ll find out more about how to
design layouts, and you’ll learn how each UI component you add
to your layout is derived from a common View ancestor. Along
the way, you’ll discover why String resources are so important
for flexible, well-designed apps.
1. “Let’s build a Beer Adviser app”
2. “Create the project”
3. “A closer look at the design editor”
4. “Add a button using the design editor”
5. “A closer look at the layout code”
6. “Let’s update the layout XML”
7. “The XML changes are reflected in the design editor”
8. “There are warnings in the layout…”
9. “Put text in a String resource file”
10. “Extract the String resource”
11. “Add and use a new String resource”
12. “String Resources Up Close ”
13. “Add values to the spinner”
14. “Add the string-array to strings.xml”
15. “We need to make the app interactive”
16. “What the MainActivity code looks like”
17. “A button can listen for on-click events…”
18. “Get a reference to the button…”
19. “Pass a lambda to the setOnClickListener method”
20. “How to edit a text view’s text”
21. “The updated code for MainActivity.kt”
22. “What happens when you run the code”
23. “Add the getBeers() method”
24. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 3
We’ve only scratched the surface of using layouts. So far,
you’ve seen how to arrange views in a simple linear layout, but
there’s so much more that layouts can do. In this chapter we’ll go a
little deeper and show you how layouts really work. You’ll learn
how to fine-tune your linear layouts. You’ll discover how to use
frame layouts and scroll views. And by the end of the chapter,
you’ll learn that even though they might look a little different, all
layouts—and the views you add to them—have more in common
than you might think.
1. “It all starts with a layout”
2. “Android has different types of layout”
3. “How to define a linear layout”
4. “Orientation can be vertical or horizontal”
5. “Anatomy of AndroidManifest.xml ”
6. “Use padding to add space to the layout’s edges”
7. “The layout code so far”
8. “An edit text lets you enter text”
9. “Add views to the layout XML”
10. “Make a view streeeeetch by adding weight”
11. “How to add weight to one view”
12. “How to add weight to multiple views”
13. “Values you can use with the android:gravity attribute”
14. “The story so far”
15. “More values you can use with the android:layout-gravity
attribute”
16. “Use margins to add space between views”
17. “Your activity code tells Android which layout it uses”
18. “Layout inflation: an example”
19. “A frame layout stacks its views”
20. “Add an image to your project”
21. “Drawable Resources Up Close ”
22. “A frame layout stacks views in the order they appear in
the layout XML”
23. “All layouts are a type of ViewGroup…”
24. “A scroll view inserts a vertical scrollbar”
25. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 4
You don’t build a house without a blueprint. And some layouts
use blueprints to make sure they look exactly the way you want.
In this chapter, we’ll introduce you to Android’s constraint
layout: a flexible way of designing more complex UIs. You’ll
discover how constraints and bias let you position and size your
views, irrespective of screen size and orientation. You’ll find out
how to keep views in their place with guidelines and barriers.
Finally, you’ll learn how to pack or spread views with chains and
flows.
1. “Nested layouts revisited”
2. “Introducing the constraint layout”
3. “Constraint layouts are part of Android Jetpack”
4. “Use Gradle to include Jetpack libraries”
5. “Let’s add a constraint layout to activity_main.xml”
6. “Add a button to the blueprint”
7. “Position views using constraints”
8. “Add a vertical constraint too”
9. “Use opposing constraints to center views”
10. “Remove constraints with the constraint widget”
11. “Changes to the blueprint appear in the XML”
12. “Views can have bias”
13. “You can change a view’s size”
14. “Most layouts need multiple views”
15. “You can connect views to other views”
16. “Align views using guidelines”
17. “Guidelines have a fixed position”
18. “Create a movable barrier”
19. “Add a horizontal barrier”
20. “Constrain a button under the barrier”
21. “Use a chain to control a linear group of views”
22. “Create the horizontal chain”
23. “There are different styles of chain”
24. “A flow is like a multi-line chain”
25. “How to add a flow”
26. “You can control the flow’s appearance”
27. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 5
Activities form the foundation of every Android app. So far
you’ve seen how to create an activity, and use it to interact with the
user. But if you don’t know about the activity lifecycle, some of its
behavior might take you by surprise. In this chapter, you’ll learn
what happens when an activity is created and destroyed, and how
this can lead to unexpected consequences. You’ll find out how to
control its behavior when it’s made visible, or hidden. You’ll even
discover ways of saving and restoring your activity’s state, just
when you need it.
1. “How do activities really work?”
2. “Create a new project”
3. “The full code for activity_main.xml”
4. “The activity code controls the stopwatch”
5. “The full code for MainActivity.kt”
6. “What happens when you run the app”
7. “Rotating the screen changes the device configuration”
8. “An activity’s states”
9. “The activity lifecycle: from create to destroy”
10. “Your activity inherits the lifecycle methods”
11. “Save the current state in a Bundle”
12. “Save the state using onSaveInstanceState()”
13. “The updated MainActivity.kt code”
14. “What happens when you run the app”
15. “There’s more to an activity’s life than create and destroy”
16. “The visible lifecycle”
17. “We need to implement two more lifecycle methods”
18. “Restart the stopwatch when the app becomes visible”
19. “What happens when you run the app”
20. “What if an activity is only partially visible?”
21. “The foreground lifecycle”
22. “Pause the stopwatch if the activity’s paused”
23. “The complete MainActivity.kt code”
24. “What happens when you run the app”
25. “Your handy guide to the activity lifecycle methods”
26. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 6
Most apps require more than one screen. So far, we’ve just
looked at how to create single-screen apps, which is fine for simple
applications. But what if you have more complex requirements?
In this chapter, you’ll learn how to use fragments and the
Navigation component to build multi-screen apps. You’ll learn
how fragments are like subactivities with their own methods.
You’ll find out how to design effective navigation graphs.
Finally, you’ll meet the navigation host and navigation
controller, and learn how they help you navigate from place to
place.
1. “Most apps need more than one screen”
2. “Each screen is a fragment”
3. “Navigate between screens using the Navigation
component”
4. “Create a new project”
5. “Add WelcomeFragment to the project”
6. “What fragment code looks like”
7. “The fragment’s onCreateView() method”
8. “Fragment layout code looks like activity layout code”
9. “You display a fragment in a FragmentContainerView”
10. “Update the activity_main.xml code”
11. “What the code does”
12. “Create MessageFragment”
13. “Use the Navigation component to navigate between
fragments”
14. “Use Gradle to add the Navigation component to your
project”
15. “Create a navigation graph”
16. “Add fragments to the navigation graph”
17. “Connect fragments using an action”
18. “Navigation graphs are XML resources”
19. “Add a navigation host to the layout using a
FragmentContainerView”
20. “Add a NavHostFragment to activity_main.xml”
21. “Add an OnClickListener to the button”
22. “Get a navigation controller”
23. “The full code for WelcomeFragment.kt”
24. “What happens when the app runs”
25. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 7
Sometimes fragments need extra information to work properly.
If a fragment shows details of a contact, for example, it needs to
know which contact to display. But what if this information comes
from another fragment? In this chapter, you’ll build on your
navigation know-how by learning how to pass data between
fragments. You’ll find out how to add arguments to navigation
destinations so they can receive the information they need. You’ll
meet the Safe Args plug-in, and learn how to use it to write typesafe code. Finally, you’ll discover how to manipulate the back
stack, and take control of back button behavior.
1. “The Secret Message app navigates between fragments”
2. “MessageFragment needs to pass the message to a new
fragment”
3. “Create EncryptFragment…”
4. “Add EncryptFragment to the navigation graph”
5. “MessageFragment needs to navigate to
EncryptFragment”
6. “Add Safe Args to the build.gradle files”
7. “EncryptFragment needs to accept a String argument”
8. “MessageFragment needs to pass a message to
EncryptFragment”
9. “Safe Args generates Directions classes”
10. “Update the MessageFragment.kt code”
11. “EncryptFragment needs to get the argument’s value”
12. “The full code for EncryptFragment.kt”
13. “What happens when the app runs”
14. “What if the user wants to go back?”
15. “Welcome to the back stack”
16. “Use the navigation graph to pop fragments off the back
stack”
17. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 8
Most apps need to be able to navigate between destinations.
And with the Android the Navigation component, building this UI
became much simpler. Here, you’ll learn how to use some of
Android’s navigation UI components so that your users can
navigate your app more easily. You’ll see how to use themes,
and replace your app’s default app bar with a toolbar. You’ll learn
how to add menu items you can use for navigation. You’ll
discover how to implement bottom bar navigation. Finally, you’ll
create a swish navigation drawer: a panel that slides out from the
side of your activity.
1. “Different apps, different structures”
2. “Android includes navigation UI components”
3. “How the CatChat app will work”
4. “Apply a theme in AndroidManifest.xml”
5. “Define styles in style resource files”
6. “Replace the default app bar with a toolbar”
7. “Create InboxFragment”
8. “Specify items in the toolbar with a menu resource file”
9. “onCreateOptionsMenu() adds menu items to the toolbar”
10. “Respond to menu item clicks with
onOptionsItemSelected()”
11. “Configure the toolbar using an AppBarConfiguration”
12. “What happens when the app runs”
13. “Most types of UI navigation work with the Navigation
component”
14. “Create SentItemsFragment”
15. “The bottom navigation bar needs a new menu resource
file”
16. “Link the bottom navigation bar to the navigation
controller”
17. “A navigation drawer lets you display many navigation
items”
18. “Add the support section…”
19. “Highlight the selected item with groups”
20. “Create the navigation drawer’s header”
21. “How to create a navigation drawer”
22. “Configure the toolbar’s drawer icon…”
23. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 9
Most apps need a slick UI that responds to the user. You’ve so
far learned how to use views such as text views, buttons, and
spinners, and applied Material themes to make sweeping changes
to your app’s look and feel. But there’s so much more you can do.
Here, you’ll learn how to make your UI more responsive with the
coordinator layout. You’ll create toolbars that can collapse or
scroll on a whim. You’ll discover exciting new views such as
checkboxes, radio buttons, chips, and floating action buttons.
Finally, you’ll find out how to display friendly pop-up messages
using toasts and snackbars.
1. “Material is used throughout Androidville”
2. “The Bits and Pizzas app”
3. “Create OrderFragment”
4. “Replace the default app bar with a toolbar”
5. “Fragments don’t have a setSupportActionBar() method”
6. “The coordinator layout coordinates animations between
views”
7. “The app bar layout enables toolbar animation”
8. “Tell the toolbar how to respond to scroll events”
9. “How to create a plain collapsing toolbar”
10. “How to add an image to a collapsing toolbar”
11. “We need to build OrderFragment’s main content”
12. “Choose a pizza type using a radio button”
13. “A chip is a type of flexible compound button”
14. “Add multiple chips to a chip group”
15. “A FAB is a floating action button”
16. “You can anchor a FAB to a collapsing toolbar”
17. “We need to build OrderFragment’s layout”
18. “Add an OnClickListener to the FAB”
19. “A toast is a simple pop-up message”
20. “Display the pizza order in a snackbar”
21. “The snackbar code for the pizza order”
22. “The full code for OrderFragment.kt”
23. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 10
It’s time to wave farewell to findViewById(). As you’ve
probably noticed by now, the more views you have and the more
interactive your apps become, the more calls you need to make to
findViewById(). And if you’re getting tired of typing the code for
this method every time you want to work with a view, you’re not
alone. In this chapter, you’ll discover how to make
findViewById() a thing of the past by implementing view
binding. You’ll find out how to apply this technique to both
activity and fragment code, and you’ll learn why this approach is
a safer, more efficient way of accessing your layout’s views.
1. “Behind the scenes of findViewById()”
2. “There’s a downside to findViewById()”
3. “View binding to the rescue”
4. “Here’s how we’ll use view binding”
5. “The Stopwatch app revisited”
6. “Enable view binding in the app build.gradle file”
7. “How to add view binding to an activity”
8. “Use the binding property to interact with views”
9. “The full code for MainActivity.kt”
10. “What the code does”
11. “Fragments can use view binding too (but the code’s a
little different)”
12. “Enable view binding for Bits and Pizzas”
13. “Fragment view binding code is a little different”
14. “Fragments can access views from onCreateView() to
onDestroyView()”
15. “Fragment Lifecycle Methods Up Close ”
16. “What fragment view binding code looks like”
17. “_binding refers to the binding object…”
18. “The full code for OrderFragment.kt”
19. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 11
As apps grow more complex, fragments have more to juggle.
And if you’re not careful, this can lead to bloated code that tries to
do everything. Business logic, navigation, controlling the UI,
dealing with configuration changes…you name it, it’s in there. In
this chapter, you’ll learn how to deal with this kind of situation
using view models. You’ll discover how they simplify your
activity and fragment code. You’ll find out how they survive
configuration changes, keeping your app’s state safe and sound.
Finally, we’ll show you how to build a view model factory, and
when this might be needed.
1. “Configuration changes revisited”
2. “Introducing the view model”
3. “What the guessing game will do”
4. “How the app will be structured”
5. “Update the project build.gradle file…”
6. “The Guessing Game app has two fragments”
7. “How navigation should work”
8. “Update the navigation graph”
9. “What happens when the app runs”
10. “The game loses state when the screen rotates”
11. “A view model holds business logic”
12. “Add a view model dependency to the app build.gradle
file…”
13. “Create a GameViewModel object”
14. “What happens when the app runs”
15. “ View Models Up Close”
16. “ResultViewModel needs to hold the result”
17. “A view model factory creates view models”
18. “Create the ResultViewModelFactory class”
19. “Use the factory to create the view model”
20. “What happens when the app runs”
21. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 12
Your code often needs to react to property value changes. If a
view model property changes value, for example, the fragment
might need to respond by updating its views or navigating
elsewhere. But how does a fragment get to hear when a
property’s been updated? Here, we’ll introduce you to live data:
a way of telling interested parties when something’s changed.
You’ll learn all about MutableLiveData, and how to make your
fragment observe properties of this type. You’ll discover how
the LiveData type helps maintain your app’s integrity.
1. “The Guessing Game app revisited”
2. “The fragments decide when to update views”
3. “Here’s what we’re going to do”
4. “GameViewModel and GameFragment need to use live
data”
5. “Live data objects use a value property”
6. “The fragment observes the view model properties and
reacts to changes.”
7. “The full code for GameFragment.kt”
8. “What happens when the app runs”
9. “Fragments can update GameViewModel’s properties”
10. “What happens when the app runs”
11. “GameFragment still includes game logic”
12. “The full code for GameViewModel.kt”
13. “Make GameFragment observe the new property”
14. “What happens when the app runs”
15. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 13
Layouts can do more than control your app’s appearance. All
of the layouts you’ve written so far have been told how they should
behave by activity or fragment code. But just imagine if the
layouts could think for themselves, and make their own
decisions. In this chapter, we’ll introduce you to data binding: a
way of boosting your layout’s IQ. You’ll find out how to make
views get values directly from the view model. You’ll use listener
binding to make buttons call their methods. You’ll even discover
how one simple line of code lets views respond to live data
updates.
1. “Back to the Guessing Game app”
2. “The fragments update the views in their layouts”
3. “Enable data binding in the app build.gradle file”
4. “ResultFragment updates the text in its layout”
5. “1. Add <layout> and <data> elements”
6. “2. Set the layout’s data binding variable”
7. “3. Use the layout’s data binding variable to access the
view model”
8. “What happens when the app runs”
9. “ <layout> Up Close”
10. “GameFragment can use data binding too”
11. “Add <layout> and <data> elements to
fragment_game.xml”
12. “Use the data binding variable to set the layout’s text”
13. “String resources revisited”
14. “The layout can pass parameters to String resources”
15. “We need to set the gameViewModel variable”
16. “What happens when the app runs”
17. “You can use data binding to call methods”
18. “Add finishGame() to GameViewModel.kt”
19. “Use data binding to make a button call a method when
clicked”
20. “What happens when the app runs”
21. “Fireside Chats”
22. “We can switch off view binding”
23. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 14
Most apps need data that persists. But if you don’t take steps to
store this data somewhere, it will be lost forever as soon as the
app is closed down. You usually keep data safe in Androidville by
storing it in a database, so in this chapter, we’ll introduce you to
the Room persistence library. You’ll learn how to build
databases, create tables, and define data access methods using
annotated classes and interfaces. You’ll find out how to use
coroutines to run database code in the background. And along the
way, you’ll discover how to transform your live data as soon as
it changes with a little help from Transformations.map().
1. “Most apps need to store data”
2. “Room is a database library that sits on top of SQLite”
3. “Create TasksFragment”
4. “How Room databases are created”
5. “We’ll store tasks data in a table”
6. “Specify a table name with @Entity”
7. “Use an interface to specify data operations”
8. “Use @Insert to insert a record”
9. “Use @Delete to delete a record”
10. “Create a TaskDatabase abstract class”
11. “Add properties for any DAO interfaces”
12. “MVVM revisited”
13. “Database operations can run in slooooow-moooo”
14. “1. Mark TaskDao’s methods with suspend”
15. “2. Launch the insert() method in the background”
16. “TasksViewModel needs a view model factory”
17. “We’ll use data binding to insert a record”
18. “What happens when the code runs”
19. “TasksFragment needs to display records”
20. “Use getAll() to get all tasks from the database”
21. “A LiveData<List<Task>> is a more complex type”
22. “Let’s update the TasksViewModel code”
23. “We’ll bind the tasksString property to the layout’s text
view”
24. “What happens when the code runs”
25. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 15
Lists of data are a key part of most apps. And in this chapter,
we’ll show you how to create one using a recycler view: a superflexible way of building a scrollable list. You’ll learn how to
create flexible layouts for your list, including text views,
checkboxes, and more. You’ll find out how to create adapters that
squish your data into the recycler view in whatever way you
choose. You’ll discover how to use card views to give your data a
3D material look. Finally, we’ll show you how layout managers
can completely change the look of your list with just one or two
lines of code.
1. “What the Tasks app currently looks like”
2. “We can turn the list into a recycler view”
3. “Tell the recycler view how to display each item…”
4. “The adapter adds data to the recycler view”
5. “Define the adapter’s view holder”
6. “Override the onCreateViewHolder() method”
7. “Add data to the layout’s view”
8. “We need to display the recycler view”
9. “We’ve added a recycler view to TasksFragment’s layout”
10. “TasksFragment needs to update TaskItemAdapter’s data
property”
11. “What happens when the code runs”
12. “Recycler views are very flexible”
13. “How to create a card view”
14. “The full code for task_item.xml”
15. “The adapter’s view holder needs to work with the new
layout code”
16. “The full code for TaskItemAdapter.kt”
17. “The layout manager gallery”
18. “Update fragment_tasks.xml to arrange items in a grid”
19. “What happens when the code runs”
20. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 16
Your app needs to run as smoothly and efficiently as possible.
But if you’re not careful, large or complex data sets can cause your
recycler view to glitch. In this chapter, we’ll introduce you to
DiffUtil: a utility class that adds extra smarts to your recycler
view. You’ll find out how to use it to make efficient updates to
your recycler view. You’ll discover how ListAdapters make using
DiffUtil a breeze. And along the way, you’ll learn how to get rid
of findViewById() for good by implementing data binding in
your recycler view code.
1. “The Tasks app revisited”
2. “How the recycler view gets its data”
3. “The data property’s setter calls notifyDataSetChanged()”
4. “Tell the recycler view what needs to change”
5. “Here’s what we’re going to do”
6. “We need to implement DiffUtil.ItemCallback”
7. “A ListAdapter accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback
argument”
8. “The updated code for TaskItemAdapter.kt”
9. “Populate the ListAdapter’s list…”
10. “The updated code for TasksFragment.kt”
11. “What happens when the code runs”
12. “Recycler views can use data binding”
13. “Add a data binding variable to task_item.xml”
14. “The layout gets inflated in the adapter’s view holder
code”
15. “Use the binding class to inflate the layout”
16. “The full code for TaskItemAdapter.kt”
17. “The full code for task_item.xml”
18. “What happens when the code runs”
19. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 17
Some apps rely on the user selecting an item from a list. And in
this chapter, you’ll learn how to make recycler views a core part
of your app design by making their items clickable. You’ll
discover how to implement recycler view navigation by making
the app navigate to a new screen each time the user clicks on a
record. You’ll find out how to show the user extra information
about their chosen record, and update it in the database.
1. “Recycler views can be used for navigation”
2. “Make each item clickable”
3. “Where should we create the toast?”
4. “We’ll pass a lambda to TaskItemAdapter”
5. “What happens when the code runs”
6. “We want to use the recycler view to navigate to a new
fragment”
7. “Create EditTaskFragment…”
8. “Update the navigation graph”
9. “Make TasksFragment navigate to EditTaskFragment”
10. “Make EditTaskFragment display the task ID”
11. “What happens when the code runs”
12. “We want to use EditTaskFragment to update task
records”
13. “Use TaskDao to interact with database records”
14. “Create EditTaskViewModel”
15. “EditTaskViewModel will tell EditTaskFragment when to
navigate”
16. “EditTaskViewModel needs a view model factory”
17. “fragment_edit_task.xml needs to display the task”
18. “What happens when the code runs”
19. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 18
All the UIs you’ve built so far have used views and layout files.
But with Jetpack Compose, that’s not the only option. In this
chapter, we’re going to take a road trip to Composeville, and find
out how to build UIs using Compose components called
composables instead of views. You’ll learn how to use built-in
composables such as Text, Image, TextField, and Button. You’ll
discover how to arrange them in Rows and Columns, and style
them using themes. You’ll write and preview your own
composable functions. You’ll even find out how to manage a
composable’s state using MutableState objects.
1. “UI components don’t have to be Views”
2. “Create a new Compose project”
3. “Compose projects have no layout files”
4. “What Compose activity code looks like”
5. “Use a Text composable to display text”
6. “Use composables in composable functions”
7. “Preview composables with the Design or Split option”
8. “Let’s make the app convert temperatures”
9. “Add a MainActivityContent composable function”
10. “Add an Image to MainActivity.kt”
11. “Let’s display the temperature text”
12. “Use a Button composable to add a button”
13. “We need to pass a lambda to ConvertButton”
14. “ Composition Up Close”
15. “We need to change the value of TemperatureText’s
argument”
16. “What happens when the app runs”
17. “Add a TextField to a composable function”
18. “What happens when the app runs”
19. “Add padding to the Column composable”
20. “You can center composables in Columns or Rows”
21. “Applying themes: revisited”
22. “Android Studio includes extra theme code”
23. “The full code for MainActivity.kt”
24. “Your Android Toolbox”
Chapter 19
You get the best results when things work together. So far,
you’ve learned how to build a UI using views or composables. But
what if you want to use both? In this chapter, you’ll find out how
to get the best of both worlds by adding composables to a Viewbased UI. You’ll discover techniques for making composables
work with view models. You’ll even find out how to make them
respond to LiveData updates. By the end of the chapter, you’ll
have all the tools you need to use composables with views, or
even migrate to a pure Compose UI.
1. “You can add composables to View-based UIs”
2. “The Guessing Game app structure”
3. “We’ll replace ResultFragment’s views with
composables”
4. “A ComposeView lets you add composables to a layout”
5. “Add composables using Kotlin code”
6. “Add a composable function for the fragment’s content”
7. “Reproduce the Start New Game button”
8. “Reproduce ResultFragment’s TextView”
9. “onCreateView() returns the UI’s root view”
10. “The full code for ResultFragment.kt”
11. “What happens when the app runs”
12. “Next we’ll make GameFragment use composables too”
13. “We’ll add a ComposeView to fragment_game.xml”
14. “Add a composable function for GameFragment’s
content”
15. “Reproduce the Finish Game button”
16. “Reproduce the EditText with a TextField”
17. “Reproduce the Guess button”
18. “We’ll display the incorrect guesses in a Text
composable”
19. “Create an IncorrectGuessesText composable function”
20. “Your Android Toolbox”
Appendix A
Even after all that, there’s still a little more. There are just a few
more things we think you need to know. We wouldn’t feel right
about ignoring them, and we really wanted to give you a book
you’d be able to lift without extensive training at the local gym.
Before you put down the book, read through these tidbits.
1. “1. Sharing data with other apps”
2. “2. WorkManager”
3. “3. Dialogs and notifications”
4. “4. Automated testing”
5. “5. Supporting different screen sizes”
6. “6. More Compose features”
7. “7. Retrofit”
8. “8. Android Game Development Kit”
9. “9. CameraX”
10. “10. Publishing your app”
How to use this book: Intro
NOTE
In this section, we answer the burning question: “So why DID they put that in a book on
Android?”
Who is this book for?
If you can answer “yes” to all of these:
1. Do you already know how to program in Kotlin, Java, or another
object-oriented language?
2. Do you want to master Android app development, create the next
big thing in software, make a small fortune, and retire to your own
private island?
NOTE
OK, maybe that one’s a little far-fetched. But, you gotta start somewhere,
right?
3. Do you prefer actually doing things and applying the stuff you
learn over listening to someone in a lecture rattle on for hours on
end?
this book is for you.
Who should probably back away from this book?
If you can answer “yes” to any of these:
1. Are you looking for a quick introduction or reference book to
developing Android apps?
2. Would you rather have your toenails pulled out by 15 screaming
monkeys than learn something new? Do you believe an Android
book should cover everything, especially all the obscure stuff
you’ll never use, and if it bores the reader to tears in the process,
then so much the better?
this book is not for you.
NOTE
[Note from Marketing: this book is for anyone with a credit card or a PayPal account]
We know what you’re thinking
“How can this be a serious book on developing Android apps?”
“What’s with all the graphics?”
“Can I actually learn it this way?”
We know what your brain is thinking
Your brain craves novelty. It’s always searching, scanning, waiting for
something unusual. It was built that way, and it helps you stay alive.
So what does your brain do with all the routine, ordinary, normal things you
encounter? Everything it can to stop them from interfering with the brain’s
real job—recording things that matter. It doesn’t bother saving the boring
things; they never make it past the “this is obviously not important” filter.
How does your brain know what’s important? Suppose you’re out for a day
hike and a tiger jumps in front of you—what happens inside your head and
body?
Neurons fire. Emotions crank up. Chemicals surge.
And that’s how your brain knows…
This must be important! Don’t forget it!
But imagine you’re at home or in a library. It’s a safe, warm, tiger-free
zone. You’re studying. Getting ready for an exam. Or trying to learn some
tough technical topic your boss thinks will take a week, ten days at the
most.
Just one problem. Your brain’s trying to do you a big favor. It’s trying to
make sure that this obviously unimportant content doesn’t clutter up scarce
resources. Resources that are better spent storing the really big things. Like
tigers. Like the danger of fire. Like how you should never have posted those
party photos on Instagram. And there’s no simple way to tell your brain,
“Hey brain, thank you very much, but no matter how dull this book is, and
how little I’m registering on the emotional Richter scale right now, I really
do want you to keep this stuff around.”
WE THINK OF A “HEAD FIRST” READER AS A
LEARNER.
So what does it take to learn something? First, you have to get it,
then make sure you don’t forget it. It’s not about pushing facts into
your head. Based on the latest research in cognitive science,
neurobiology, and educational psychology, learning takes a lot more
than text on a page. We know what turns your brain on.
Some of the Head First learning principles:
Make it visual. Images are far more memorable than words alone, and
make learning much more effective (up to 89% improvement in recall
and transfer studies). It also makes things more understandable. Put the
words within or near the graphics they relate to, rather than on the
bottom or on another page, and learners will be up to twice as likely to
solve problems related to the content.
Use a conversational and personalized style. In recent studies,
students performed up to 40% better on post-learning tests if the content
spoke directly to the reader, using a first-person, conversational style
rather than taking a formal tone. Tell stories instead of lecturing. Use
casual language. Don’t take yourself too seriously. Which would you
pay more attention to: a stimulating dinner-party companion, or a
lecture?
Get the learner to think more deeply. In other words, unless you
actively flex your neurons, nothing much happens in your head. A
reader has to be motivated, engaged, curious, and inspired to solve
problems, draw conclusions, and generate new knowledge. And for
that, you need challenges, exercises, and thought-provoking questions,
and activities that involve both sides of the brain and multiple senses.
Get—and keep—the reader’s attention. We’ve all had the “I really
want to learn this, but I can’t stay awake past page one” experience.
Your brain pays attention to things that are out of the ordinary,
interesting, strange, eye-catching, unexpected. Learning a new, tough,
technical topic doesn’t have to be boring. Your brain will learn much
more quickly if it’s not.
Touch their emotions. We now know that your ability to remember
something is largely dependent on its emotional content. You remember
what you care about. You remember when you feel something. No,
we’re not talking heart-wrenching stories about a boy and his dog.
We’re talking emotions like surprise, curiosity, fun, “what the…?”, and
the feeling of “I rule!” that comes when you solve a puzzle, learn
something everybody else thinks is hard, or realize you know
something that “I’m more technical than thou” Bob from Engineering
doesn’t.
Metacognition: thinking about thinking
If you really want to learn, and you want to learn more quickly and more
deeply, pay attention to how you pay attention. Think about how you think.
Learn how you learn.
Most of us did not take courses on metacognition or learning theory when
we were growing up. We were expected to learn, but rarely taught to learn.
But we assume that if you’re holding this book, you really want to learn
how to develop Android apps. And you probably don’t want to spend a lot
of time. If you want to use what you read in this book, you need to
remember what you read. And for that, you’ve got to understand it. To get
the most from this book, or any book or learning experience, take
responsibility for your brain. Your brain on this content.
The trick is to get your brain to see the new material you’re learning as
Really Important. Crucial to your well-being. As important as a tiger.
Otherwise, you’re in for a constant battle, with your brain doing its best to
keep the new content from sticking.
So just how DO you get your brain to treat Android development like it
was a hungry tiger?
There’s the slow, tedious way, or the faster, more effective way. The slow
way is about sheer repetition. You obviously know that you are able to learn
and remember even the dullest of topics if you keep pounding the same
thing into your brain. With enough repetition, your brain says, “This doesn’t
feel important to him, but he keeps looking at the same thing over and over
and over, so I suppose it must be.”
The faster way is to do anything that increases brain activity, especially
different types of brain activity. The things on the previous page are a big
part of the solution, and they’re all things that have been proven to help
your brain work in your favor. For example, studies show that putting
words within the pictures they describe (as opposed to somewhere else in
the page, like a caption or in the body text) causes your brain to try to
makes sense of how the words and picture relate, and this causes more
neurons to fire. More neurons firing = more chances for your brain to get
that this is something worth paying attention to, and possibly recording.
A conversational style helps because people tend to pay more attention
when they perceive that they’re in a conversation, since they’re expected to
follow along and hold up their end. The amazing thing is, your brain
doesn’t necessarily care that the “conversation” is between you and a book!
On the other hand, if the writing style is formal and dry, your brain
perceives it the same way you experience being lectured to while sitting in a
roomful of passive attendees. No need to stay awake.
But pictures and conversational style are just the beginning…
Here’s what WE did
We used pictures, because your brain is tuned for visuals, not text. As far as
your brain’s concerned, a picture really is worth a thousand words. And
when text and pictures work together, we embedded the text in the pictures
because your brain works more effectively when the text is within the thing
it refers to, as opposed to in a caption or buried in the body text somewhere.
We used redundancy, saying the same thing in different ways and with
different media types, and multiple senses, to increase the chance that the
content gets coded into more than one area of your brain.
We used concepts and pictures in unexpected ways because your brain is
tuned for novelty, and we used pictures and ideas with at least some
emotional content, because your brain is tuned to pay attention to the
biochemistry of emotions. That which causes you to feel something is more
likely to be remembered, even if that feeling is nothing more than a little
humor, surprise, or interest.
We used a personalized, conversational style, because your brain is tuned to
pay more attention when it believes you’re in a conversation than if it thinks
you’re passively listening to a presentation. Your brain does this even when
you’re reading.
We included activities, because your brain is tuned to learn and remember
more when you do things than when you read about things. And we made
the exercises challenging-yet-doable, because that’s what most people
prefer.
We used multiple learning styles, because you might prefer step-by-step
procedures, while someone else wants to understand the big picture first,
and someone else just wants to see an example. But regardless of your own
learning preference, everyone benefits from seeing the same content
represented in multiple ways.
We include content for both sides of your brain, because the more of your
brain you engage, the more likely you are to learn and remember, and the
longer you can stay focused. Since working one side of the brain often
means giving the other side a chance to rest, you can be more productive at
learning for a longer period of time.
And we included stories and exercises that present more than one point of
view, because your brain is tuned to learn more deeply when it’s forced to
make evaluations and judgments.
We included challenges, with exercises, and by asking questions that don’t
always have a straight answer, because your brain is tuned to learn and
remember when it has to work at something. Think about it—you can’t get
your body in shape just by watching people at the gym. But we did our best
to make sure that when you’re working hard, it’s on the right things. That
you’re not spending one extra dendrite processing a hard-to-understand
example, or parsing difficult, jargon-laden, or overly terse text.
We used people. In stories, examples, pictures, etc., because, well, you’re a
person. And your brain pays more attention to people than it does to things.
Here’s what YOU can do to bend your brain into
submission
NOTE
Cut this out and stick it on your refrigerator.
So, we did our part. The rest is up to you. These tips are a starting point;
listen to your brain and figure out what works for you and what doesn’t. Try
new things.
1. Slow down. The more you understand, the less you have to
memorize.
Don’t just read. Stop and think. When the book asks you a
question, don’t just skip to the answer. Imagine that someone really
is asking the question. The more deeply you force your brain to
think, the better chance you have of learning and remembering.
2. Do the exercises. Write your own notes.
We put them in, but if we did them for you, that would be like
having someone else do your workouts for you. And don’t just look
at the exercises. Use a pencil. There’s plenty of evidence that
physical activity while learning can increase the learning.
3. Read “There Are No Dumb Questions.”
That means all of them. They’re not optional sidebars, they’re part
of the core content! Don’t skip them.
4. Make this the last thing you read before bed. Or at least the
last challenging thing.
Part of the learning (especially the transfer to long-term memory)
happens after you put the book down. Your brain needs time on its
own, to do more processing. If you put in something new during
that processing time, some of what you just learned will be lost.
5. Talk about it. Out loud.
Speaking activates a different part of the brain. If you’re trying to
understand something, or increase your chance of remembering it
later, say it out loud. Better still, try to explain it out loud to
someone else. You’ll learn more quickly, and you might uncover
ideas you hadn’t known were there when you were reading about
it.
6. Drink water. Lots of it.
Your brain works best in a nice bath of fluid. Dehydration (which
can happen before you ever feel thirsty) decreases cognitive
function.
7. Listen to your brain.
Pay attention to whether your brain is getting overloaded. If you
find yourself starting to skim the surface or forget what you just
read, it’s time for a break. Once you go past a certain point, you
won’t learn faster by trying to shove more in, and you might even
hurt the process.
8. Feel something.
Your brain needs to know that this matters. Get involved with the
stories. Make up your own captions for the photos. Groaning over
a bad joke is still better than feeling nothing at all.
9. Write a lot of code!
There’s only one way to learn to develop Android apps: write a lot
of code. And that’s what you’re going to do throughout this book.
Coding is a skill, and the only way to get good at it is to practice.
We’re going to give you a lot of practice: every chapter has
exercises that pose a problem for you to solve. Don’t just skip over
them—a lot of the learning happens when you solve the exercises.
We included a solution to each exercise—don’t be afraid to peek at
the solution if you get stuck! (It’s easy to get snagged on
something small.) But try to solve the problem before you look at
the solution. And definitely get it working before you move on to
the next part of the book.
Read me
This is a learning experience, not a reference book. We deliberately stripped
out everything that might get in the way of learning whatever it is we’re
working on at that point in the book. And the first time through, you need to
begin at the beginning, because the book makes assumptions about what
you’ve already seen and learned.
We assume you’re new to Android, but not to Kotlin.
You’re going to learn how to build Android apps using a combination of
Kotlin and XML. We assume that you’re familiar with the Kotlin
programming language, or another object-oriented language such as Java. If
you’ve never done any Kotlin programming at all, then you might want to
read Head First Kotlin before you start on this one.
We start off by building an app in the very first chapter.
Believe it or not, even if you’ve never developed for Android before, you
can jump right in and start building apps. Along the way, you’ll learn your
way around Android Studio, the official IDE for Android development.
The examples are designed for learning.
As you work through the book, you’ll build a number of different apps.
Some of these are very small so you can focus on a specific part of
Android. Other apps are larger so you can see how different components fit
together. We won’t complete every part of every app, but feel free to
experiment and finish them yourself. It’s all part of the learning experience.
We show you the code in context.
We know how frustrating it can be to be shown a piece of code out of
context, with no explanation of how it works, or how to use it in your own
projects. In this book, we’ll show you small snippets of code and explain
what each bit does and why. We’ll then show you how the code works in
the context of a complete project. You can even examine all the book’s
source code by downloading it from here: https://tinyurl.com/hfad3.
The activities are NOT optional.
The exercises and activities are not add-ons; they’re part of the core content
of the book. Some of them are to help with memory, some are for
understanding, and some will help you apply what you’ve learned. Don’t
skip the exercises.
The redundancy is intentional and important.
One distinct difference in a Head First book is that we want you to really
get it. And we want you to finish the book remembering what you’ve
learned. Most reference books don’t have retention and recall as a goal, but
this book is about learning, so you’ll see some of the same concepts come
up more than once and in different ways.
The Brain Power exercises don’t have answers.
For some of them, there is no right answer, and for others, part of the
learning experience of the Brain Power activities is for you to decide if and
when your answers are right. In some of the Brain Power exercises, you
will find hints to point you in the right direction.
The truly awesome technical review team
Jacqui Cope
Ken Kousen
Ingo Krotzky
Ash Tappin
Technical reviewers:
Jacqui Cope started coding to avoid school netball practice. Since then, she
has gathered considerable experience working with a variety of financial
and education systems, from coding in COBOL to test management. She
has since gained her MSc in Computer Security and has moved into Quality
Assurance in the higher education sector. In her spare time, Jacqui likes to
cook, walk in the countryside, and watch Doctor Who from behind the sofa.
Ingo Krotzky has been working in a variety of roles in the healthcare
industry, mostly for Contract Research Organizations conducting clinical
trials—a systems architect, DBA and database programmer, software
developer and data engineer. In his spare time, he enjoys living amidst the
(mostly not-so-wild) wildlife in the countryside; pair programming with
squirrels, jaybirds, and finches; and exploring the hottest new mobile
frameworks.
Ken Kousen is a Java Champion, Oracle Groundbreaker Ambassador, and
Grails Rock Star. He is the author of the Pragmatic Library book Help Your
Boss Help You, the O’Reilly books Kotlin Cookbook, Modern Java Recipes,
and Gradle Recipes for Android, and the Manning book Making Java
Groovy. He has recorded over a dozen video courses for the O’Reilly
Learning Platform, covering topics related to Android, Spring, Java,
Groovy, Grails, and Gradle. He is also a multiple-time winner of the
JavaOne Rockstar award. His academic background includes BS degrees in
Mechanical Engineering and Mathematics from MIT, an MA and PhD in
Aerospace Engineering from Princeton, and an MS in Computer Science
from RPI He is currently President of Kousen IT, Inc., based in
Connecticut.
Ash Tappin is a polyglot software developer who works primarily on web
applications. He gets very enthusiastic about building new things that make
people’s lives easier. When not coding, he enjoys practicing guitar, listening
to music, running, cycling, exploring the outdoors, and gardening.
Acknowledgments
Our editor:
We are immensely grateful to our wonderful editor Virginia Wilson for
picking up the reins on the third edition of this book. She’s been a delight to
work with, and gave us invaluable feedback and insights. Her amazing
organization and herding skills helped keep this book on track, and she
worked hard to make sure we had everything we needed exactly when we
needed it. We’ve truly appreciated her hard work and support.
The O’Reilly team:
A big thank you goes to Zan McQuade for asking us to write the third
edition of this book, and for all her support; Shira Evans and Nicole Taché
for giving us extra editorial feedback; the design team for their amazing
new artwork, and for helping us to replace the old elements; and Katie
Tozer and Kristen Brown for making early releases of the book available.
Finally, thanks go to the production team for expertly steering the book
through the production process, and for working so hard behind the scenes.
Family, friends, and colleagues:
Writing a Head First book is always a rollercoaster of a ride, and the third
edition of this book has been no exception. We’ve truly valued the kindness
and support of our family and friends along the way. Special thanks go to
Mum, Dad, Rob, Lorraine, Mark, Laura, Andy, Aisha, Andy, Matti,
Ian, Vanessa, Dawn, William, and Simon.
The without-whom list:
Our awesome technical review team worked hard to give us their thoughts
on the book, keep us straight, and make sure that what we covered was spot
on. We’re also grateful to everyone who gave us feedback on the early
release of this book, and the previous two editions. We think the book’s
much better as a result.
Finally, our thanks to Kathy Sierra and Bert Bates for creating this
extraordinary series of books, teaching us to throw away the old rulebook,
and letting us into their brains.
O’Reilly Online Learning
For more than 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technology and
business training, knowledge, and insight to help companies succeed.
Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge and
expertise through books, articles, and our online learning platform.
O’Reilly’s online learning platform gives you on-demand access to live
training courses, in-depth learning paths, interactive coding environments,
and a vast collection of text and video from O’Reilly and 200+ other
publishers. For more information, visit http://oreilly.com.
Chapter 1. Getting Started:
Diving In
Android is the world’s most popular mobile operating system.
And there are billions of Android users worldwide, all waiting to download
your next great idea. In this chapter, you’ll find out how to start turning
your ideas into reality by is the world’s most popular mobile operating
system.building a basic Android app, and updating it. You’ll learn how to
run it on physical and virtual devices. Along the way, you’ll meet two of the
core components of all Android apps: activities and layouts. Let’s dive
in…
Welcome to Androidville
Android is the world’s most popular mobile platform. At last count, there
were over three billion active Android devices worldwide, and that number
is still growing.
Android is a comprehensive open source platform based on Linux and
championed by Google. It’s a powerful development framework that
includes everything you need to build great apps. What’s more, it enables
you to deploy those apps to a wide variety of devices—phones, tablets, and
more.
So what makes up a typical Android app?
We’re going to build Android apps using Kotlin and XML. We’ll
explain things along the way, but you’ll need some understanding of
Kotlin to get the most out of this book.
Activities define what the app does
Each Android app includes one or more activities. An activity is a special
class —usually written in Kotlin—that controls the app’s behavior, and
decides how to respond to the user. If the app includes a button, for
example, you add code to the activity that says what the button should do
when the user taps or clicks on it.
Layouts define what each screen looks like
A typical Android app is composed of one or more screens. You define
what each screen looks like using a layout file, or more activity code.
Layouts are usually defined using XML, and each screen can include
components such as buttons, text, and images.
There may be extra files too
In addition to activities and layouts, Android apps often need extra
resources such as image files and application data. You can add any extra
files you need to the app.
Android apps are really just a bunch of files in particular directories. When
you build your app, these files get bundled together, giving you an app you
can run on your device.
Activities and layouts form the backbone of
your app
In a typical app, activities and layouts work together to define the app’s user
interface. The layouts tell Android how the different screen elements should
be arranged, and the activities control the app’s behavior. If the app features
a button, for example, the layout specifies its position, and the activity
controls what happens when the user clicks on it.
Here’s how activities and layouts work together when you run an app on
your device:
1. Android starts the app’s main activity.
2. The activity tells Android to use a specific layout.
3. The layout is displayed on the device.
4. The user interacts with the layout.
5. The activity responds to these interactions, and updates the
display…
6. …which the user sees on the device.
Now that you have an idea about how Android apps are put together, let’s
go ahead and build a basic Android app.
Here’s what we’re going to do
So let’s dive in and create an Android app. There are just a few things we
need to do:
1. Set up a development environment.
We need to install Android Studio, which includes all the tools you
need to develop Android apps.
2. Build a basic app.
We’ll build a simple app using Android Studio that will display
some sample text on the screen.
3. Run the app.
We’ll run the app on a physical device, and a virtual one, to see it
up and running.
4. Change the app.
Finally, we’ll tweak the app we created, and run it again.
11:04
My First App
We're going to use Android Studio
to build all the apps in this book.
Android Studio
Arctic Fox | 2020.3.1
Projects
Customiz0
Plugins
Learn Android Studio
We'll build and run this
app in steps 2 and 3.
Hello World!
11:18
Welcome to Android Studio
Welcome to Android Studio
Create a new project to start from scratch
Open existing project from disk or version control.
Project Open Get from VCS
My First App
More Actions
We'll change the app
and rerun it in step 4.
Pow!
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Are all Android apps developed in Kotlin?
A: You can develop Android apps in other languages too, such as Java,
but nowadays it’s best if you use Kotlin. This is because there are some
features that are only available in Kotlin.
Q: How do I learn Kotlin?
A: We may be biased, but we think that the best way of learning Kotlin
is to get a copy of our book Head First Kotlin. It will teach you
everything you need to know about Kotlin in order to get the most out
of this book.
Q: Did you say you can use activity code to define the app’s
appearance instead of using layout files?
A: Yes, using a toolkit called Jetpack Compose.
You’ll learn how to use Compose later in the book. For now, we’re
going to focus on defining the app’s UI using layout files.
Android Studio: your development
environment
The best way of developing Android apps is to use Android Studio, the
official IDE for Android app development.
Android Studio is based on IntelliJ IDEA, which you may already be
familiar with. It includes a set of code editors, UI tools and templates,
which are all designed to make your life in Androidville easier.
It also includes the Android SDK—or Android Software Development Kit
—which is required for all Android app development. The Android SDK
includes Android source files, and a compiler that’s used to compile your
code into an Android format.
Here are some of the main components of the Android SDK:
You need to install Android Studio
As Android Studio includes all the tools and features you need in order to
develop Android apps, we’re going to use it to build all of the apps featured
in this book.
Before we go any further, you need to install Android Studio on your
machine. There are more details about how to do this on the next page.
Install Android Studio
To get the most out of this book, you need to install Android Studio. We’re
not including the full installation instructions here as they can get out of
date pretty quickly, but you’ll be fine if you follow the online instructions.
First, check the Android Studio system requirements here:
https://developer.android.com/studio#Requirements
NOTE
These URLs sometimes change. If they don’t work, search for Android Studio and you
should find the appropriate pages.
Then download Android Studio from here:
https://developer.android.com/studio
NOTE
These URLs sometimes change. If they don’t work, search for Android Studio and you
should find the appropriate pages.
and follow the installation instructions
Once you’ve installed Android Studio, open it and follow the instructions to
add the latest SDK tools and Support Libraries.
In this book, we’re using Android Studio 2020.3.1 (known as Arctic
Fox). Make sure you install at least this version.
If you’ve previously installed an earlier version of Android Studio, we
recommend that you restore the IDE’s default settings. To do this, go to
the File menu, choose Manage IDE Settings, and then select the Restore
Default Settings option.
NOTE
This resets any old settings Android Studio might be holding on to that could stop your
code from running.
When you’re done, you should see the Android Studio welcome screen like
this:
Let’s build a basic app
Now that you’ve set up your development environment, you’re ready to
create your first Android app. Here’s what it will look like:
Let’s go ahead and build the app.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Do I have to use Android Studio to build Android apps? Can I
use another IDE instead?
A: Strictly speaking, all you need is a tool that will let you write and
compile Kotlin code, plus a few other tools to convert the compiled
code into a form that Android devices can run. Saying that, Android
Studio is the official IDE for Android, and the Android team
recommends using it. We think it’s a great IDE for Android app
development, so that’s why we’ve decided to use it.
Q: Can I write Android apps without using an IDE?
A: It’s possible, but it’s a lot more work.
It’s far quicker and easier to use an IDE, so we recommend that you use
Android Studio.
How to build the app
Whenever you create a new app, you need to create a new project for it.
Make sure you have Android Studio open, and follow along with us.
1. Create a new project
The Android Studio welcome screen gives you a number of options. We
want to create a new project, so make sure the Projects option is selected,
then click on “New Project.”
2. Select a project template
You next need to specify the type of Android Studio project you want to
create. We’re going to create an app with an empty activity that runs on a
phone or tablet, so make sure the Phone and Tablet option is selected, and
choose the Empty Activity option. You’ll find out more about what the
Empty Activity option gives you a few pages ahead, but for now, click the
Next button to move to the next step.
3. Configure your project
You now need to configure the project by specifying an app name, package
name, and save location. Enter a name of “My First App” and a package
name of “com.hfad.myfirstapp” and accept the default save location.
You also need to tell Android Studio which programming language you
want to use, and specify a minimum SDK. This refers to the lowest version
of Android the app will support: there’s more about SDK levels on the next
page.
Select Kotlin for the language and choose a minimum SDK of API 21 so
that the app will run on most devices. When you click on the Finish button,
Android Studio will create the project. We’ll look at what this involves a
couple of pages ahead.
New Project
Empty Activity
Creates a new empty activity This is the name of the app.
Name My First App
Package name com.hfad.myfirstappThis is the package name.
Save location /Users/dawng/AndroidStudioProjects/MyFirstApp
-All the
Project's files will
be saved
Language Kotlin here. We're using Kotlin.
Minimum SDK API 21: Android 5.0 (Lollipop)
The minimum SDK is
the lowest version
the app will support.
The app will run on
devices with this level
APl or higher. It
won't run on devices
with a lower API.
Your app will run on approximately 94.1% of devices.
Help me choose
Use legacy android.support libraries ?
Using legacy android.support libraries will prevent you from using
the latest Play Services and Jetpack libraries
Cancel Previous Next Finish
When
you're done
click on
the Finish
button
ANDROID VERSIONS UP CLOSE
You’ve probably heard a lot of tasty things about Android versions like
Nougat, Oreo, and Pie. So what’s with all the food?
Android versions have a version number and a code name. The version
number gives the precise version of Android (e.g., 9.0), while the code
name is a more generic name that may cover several versions of
Android (e.g., Pie). The API level refers to the version of the APIs used
by apps. As an example, the equivalent API level for Android version
9.0 is 28.
After Pie, Android code names stopped sounding quite so tasty.
Android version 10.0, for example, is simply known as Android 10.
When you develop Android apps, you need to consider which versions
of Android you want the app to be compatible with. If you specify that
the app is only compatible with the very latest version of the SDK, you
might find that it can’t be run on many devices. You can find out more
about the percentage of devices running particular versions by clicking
on the “Help me choose” option when you create a new project.
You’ve created your first Android project
Once you’ve been through the New Project wizard, it takes Android Studio
a minute or so to create the project. During this time, it does the following:
It configures the project to your specifications.
Android Studio looks at the minimum SDK you want the app to
support, and includes all of the files and folders needed for a basic
valid app. It also sets up the package structure and names the app.
It adds some template code.
The template code is comprised of a layout written in XML and an
activity written in Kotlin. You’ll find out more about these later in
the chapter.
When Android Studio has finished creating the project, it automatically
opens it for you.
Here’s what our project looks like (don’t worry if it looks complicated—
we’ll break it down over the next few pages):
Dissecting your new project
An Android app is really just a bunch of valid files in a particular folder
structure, and Android Studio sets all of this up for you when you create a
new app. The easiest way of looking at this folder structure is to use the
explorer in the leftmost column of Android Studio.
The folder structure includes different types of files
The explorer contains all of the projects that you currently have open. Here,
we have a single project named MyFirstApp, which is the one we’ve just
created.
If you browse through the various folders in the explorer, you’ll see that the
wizard has created various types of files and folders for you like this:
Kotlin and XML source files
Android Studio automatically created an activity file named
MainActivity.kt, and a layout named activity_main.xml.
Resource files
These include default image files, themes the app might use, and
any common String values used by the app.
Android libraries
In the wizard, you specified the minimum SDK you want the app
to be compatible with. Android Studio makes sure the app includes
the relevant Android libraries for that version.
Configuration files
The configuration files tell Android what’s included in the app, and
how the app should run.
Let’s take a closer look at some of the key files and folders in your project.
Introducing the key files in your project
Android Studio projects use the Gradle build system to compile and deploy
apps, and Gradle projects have a standard structure. Below are some of the
key files and folders in that structure you’ll be working with.
To see this view of the folder structure, change the explorer view in
Android Studio from Android to Project. You do this by clicking on the
arrow at the top of the explorer pane, and selecting the Project option.
Edit code with the Android Studio editors
You view and edit files using the Android Studio editors. Double-click on
the file you want to work with, and the file’s contents will appear in the
middle of the Android Studio window.
The code editor
Most files get displayed in the code editor, which is just like a text editor,
but with extra features such as syntax highlighting and code checking.
The design editor
If you’re editing a layout (for example activity_main.xml), you have an
extra option. Rather than edit the code, you can use the design editor, which
allows you to drag GUI components onto the layout, and arrange them how
you want. The code editor and design editor give different views of the
same file, so you can switch back and forth between the two.
The story so far
In the chapter so far, we’ve done two things:
1. We set up the development environment.
We’re using Android Studio to develop Android apps, so you
needed to install it on a machine.
2. We’ve built a basic app.
We used Android Studio to create a new Android project.
You’ve had a glimpse of what the app looks like in Android Studio, and got
a feel for how it hangs together. But what you really want is to see it
running, right?
Android Studio lets you run an app in two ways: on a physical Android
device, and on a virtual one. We’ll show you each approach a few pages
ahead.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Why does Android Studio put Kotlin code in a folder named
java?
A: Before the Android team adopted Kotlin as their preferred language,
most Android apps were developed using Java. The java folder name is
left over from this time, but it may change in the future.
Q: You said that the project includes an activity named
MainActivity.kt and a layout named activity_main.xml. Where did
these come from?
A: When we created the project, we chose the option to create a project
using an empty activity. Android Studio automatically named the
activity file MainActivity.kt, and added a corresponding layout file
named activity_main.xml. You’ll find out more about these files later in
the chapter.
Q: You said that Android Studio projects use Gradle. Remind me,
what’s that?
A: Gradle is a tool that lets you compile, build, and deliver code. Most
IDEs use Gradle, and it can be used for more than just Android app
development.
All Gradle projects have a standard folder structure, and Android Studio
uses this folder structure for all its projects.
Q: Why does Android Studio use Gradle?
A: When you develop Android apps, you often need to include extra
libraries that aren’t included in the Android SDK. Gradle can download
these libraries for you, which makes your coding life much easier.
Gradle also uses Groovy and Kotlin as a scripting language, which
means you can easily create quite complex builds with Gradle.
Q: How much do I need to know about Gradle?
A: You don’t need any Gradle experience to get the most out of this
book. We’ll explain everything you need to know as and when it’s
needed.
WHAT’S MY PURPOSE?
Here’s the code from an example activity file named MainActivity.kt.
We know you’ve not seen activity code before, but see if you can match
each of the descriptions at the bottom of the page to the correct lines of
code. We’ve done one to get you started.
WHAT’S MY PURPOSE SOLUTION?
Here’s the code from an example activity file named MainActivity.kt.
We know you’ve not seen activity code before, but see if you can match
each of the descriptions at the bottom of the page to the correct lines of
code. We’ve done one to get you started.
How to run the app on a physical device
If you have an Android device that’s running Lollipop or above, you can
use it to run the app we’ve just created.
NOTE
You can check this by looking at the Android version in the device settings. Lollipop is
version 5.0, so it needs to 5.0 or higher.
Here are the steps to run the app on a physical device:
1. Enable USB debugging on your device
To allow Android Studio to run apps on your device, you need to enable
USB debugging. This feature is available in the “Developer options”
setting, which is disabled by default.
On your device, go to Settings → About Phone and tap the build number
seven times. This enables the developer options. Then, go to Settings →
System → Advanced → Developer options, and turn on USB debugging.
NOTE
Yep, seriously.
2. Set up your computer to detect the device
If you’re using a Mac, you can skip this step.
If you’re using Windows, you’ll need to install a USB driver if one isn’t
already there. The latest instructions are here:
https://developer.android.com/studio/run/oem-usb
If you’re using Ubuntu Linux, you need to create a udev rules file. The
latest instructions on how to do this are here:
https://developer.android.com/studio/run/device#setting-up
3. Use a USB cable to plug your device into your
computer
You will probably be asked if want to allow USB debugging. If so, check
the “Always allow from this computer” option and choose OK.
When we created the app, we specified a minimum API level of 21
(Lollipop). Your device needs this version of Android or above for the
app to run.
4. Run the app
Finally, select the device from the list of devices in Android Studio’s top
toolbar (if it’s not there, on your device go to Settings → Connected
devices, select USB, and choose the “File transfer” option). Then run the
app by choosing “Run ‘app’” from the Run menu. Android Studio will
build the project, install the app on your device, and launch it.
We’ll look at the app a few pages ahead, after we’ve seen how to run it on a
virtual device.
How to run the app on a virtual device
If you don’t have an Android device on hand, or it doesn’t have the right
version of Android, you can run the app on a virtual device instead.
Running the app on a virtual device is useful if you want to see how the app
looks on a type of device you don’t own, or test how it behaves on a
different version of Android.
The Android SDK features a built-in emulator that you can use to set up
one or more Android Virtual Devices (AVDs). Once you’ve set up an
AVD, you can run the app on it as though it’s running on a physical device.
NOTE
You can find system requirements for using the emulator here:
https://developer.android.com/studio/run/emulator#requirements
The emulator recreates the exact hardware environment of an Android
device: from its CPU and memory through to the sound chips and the video
display. The emulator is built on an existing emulator called QEMU
(pronounced “queue em you”), which is similar to other virtual machine
applications you may have used, like VirtualBox or VMWare.
The exact appearance and behavior of the AVD depends on how you set it
up. If, say, you create an AVD based on a Pixel 3 running Android 11, it
will look and behave just like a Pixel 3 running this version of Android on
your computer.
Let’s set up an AVD so that you can see the app running in the emulator.
Create an Android Virtual Device (AVD)
There are a few steps you need to go through in order to set up an AVD
within Android Studio. We’ll set up a Pixel 3 AVD running API level 30
(Android 11) so that you can see how the app looks and behaves running on
this type of device. The steps are pretty much identical no matter what type
of virtual device you want to set up.
Open the Android Virtual Device Manager
The AVD Manager allows you to set up new AVDs, and view and edit ones
you’ve already created. Open it by selecting AVD Manager on the Tools
menu.
If you have no AVDs set up already, you’ll be presented with a screen
prompting you to create one. Click on the Create Virtual Device button.
Select the hardware
On the next screen, you’ll be prompted to choose a device definition. This
is the type of device your AVD will emulate. You can choose a variety of
phone, tablet, wear, or TV devices.
We’re going to see what the app looks like running on a Pixel 3 phone.
Choose Phone from the Category menu and Pixel 3 from the list. Then click
on the Next button.
Select a system image
Next, you need to select a system image. This specifies which version of
Android you want to be on the AVD.
You need to choose a version of Android that’s compatible with the app
you’re building. It must be at least the minimum SDK that the app supports.
When you created your Android project, you specified that the minimum
SDK is API level 21. This means that you need to choose a system image
that’s for API level 21 (Lollipop) or above. If you choose an older version
of Android than this, the app won’t be able to run on the device.
Here, we’re going to see what the app looks like on a relatively new version
of Android, so choose the system image with a release name of R and a
target of Android 11.0 (API level 30). Then click Next.
Verify the AVD configuration
On the next screen, you’ll be asked to verify the configuration. This screen
summarizes the options you chose over the last few screens, and gives you
the option of changing them. Accept the options, and click on the Finish
button.
The virtual device gets created
When you click on the Finish button, the Device Manager creates the
virtual device for you, and displays it in the AVD Manager’s list of virtual
devices like this:
Check the new AVD is listed, then close the AVD Manager.
Run the app on the AVD
Once you’ve created the AVD, you can run the app on it.
To run the app, make sure that the virtual device is selected in the list of
devices in Android Studio’s top toolbar, then run the app by choosing the
“Run ‘app’” command from the Run menu.
The AVD can take a while to load, so while we wait, let’s take a look at
what happens behind the scenes when you use the Run command.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Do I need to create a new AVD each time I create a new app?
A: No, once you’ve created the AVD you can use it to run any app that
can run that version of Android.
Q: Can I create multiple AVDs?
A: Yes! You can set up AVDs to emulate different devices or Android
versions, including Android beta releases. This lets you test how the
app runs on each one. You might, say, want to create a tablet AVD so
you can see how the app looks and behaves on larger devices.
Compile, package, deploy, run
The Run command doesn’t just run your app. It also handles all the
preliminary tasks that are needed for the app to run.
Here’s an overview of what happens:
An APK file is an Android application package. It’s like a ZIP or JAR
file for Android applications.
1. The Kotlin source files get compiled to bytecode.
2. An Android application package, or APK file, gets created.
The APK file includes the compiled Kotlin files, along with any
libraries and resources needed by the app.
3. The APK is installed on the device.
If the device is virtual, Android Studio launches the emulator and
waits until the AVD is active before installing the APK.
If the device is physical, it just installs the APK.
4. The device starts the app’s main activity.
The app is displayed on the device screen, and it’s all ready for you
to play with.
Now that you know what happens when you use the Run command, let’s
see what the app we’ve built looks like.
Test Drive
Make sure you’ve run the app on a physical or virtual device by choosing
the “Run ‘app’” command from the Run menu.
Android Studio loads the app onto the device and starts it. The app name
“My First App” appears at the top of the screen, and the text “Hello
World!” is displayed in the center.
Let’s run through what just happened.
What just happened?
Let’s break down what happens when you run the app:
1. Android Studio installs the app on the device.
If the device is virtual, it waits for the emulator to start before
installing the app.
2. Android starts the app’s main activity.
It uses the code in MainActivity.kt (which Android Studio
automatically included in the project) to create a MainActivity
object.
3. MainActivity specifies that it uses the layout activity_main.xml.
4. The layout is displayed on the screen.
The text “Hello World!” appears in the center of the screen.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Kotlin and Java are both Java VM languages. Does this mean
that Android apps run in a JVM?
A: No. Each app runs in its own process using the Android runtime
(ART). This means that apps run a lot faster and more efficiently.
Let’s refine the app
So far in this chapter, you’ve built a basic Android app and seen it running
on a physical or virtual device. Next, we’re going to refine the app.
At the moment, the app displays the sample text “Hello World!” that the
wizard put in as a placeholder. You’re going to change that text to say
something else instead. So what do we need to change in order to achieve
that?
To answer that question, let’s take a step back and see how the app is
currently built.
The app has one activity and one layout
When we built the app, we told Android Studio how to configure it, and the
wizard did the rest. The wizard created an activity for us, and also a default
layout.
The activity controls what the app does
Android Studio created an activity for us named MainActivity.kt. The
activity specifies what the app does and how it should respond to the user.
The layout controls the app’s appearance
MainActivity.kt uses the layout Android Studio created for us named
activity_main.xml. The layout specifies what the app looks like.
We want to change the appearance of the app by updating the text that’s
displayed. This means that we need to update the file that controls what the
app looks like, so we need to take a closer look at the layout.
What’s in the layout?
We want to change the sample “Hello World!” text that Android Studio
created for us, so let’s start with the layout file activity_main.xml. Open it
now (if it’s not already open) by finding the file in the
app/src/main/res/layout folder in the explorer and double-clicking on it.
The design editor
As you learned earlier, there are two ways of viewing and editing layout
files in Android Studio: through the design editor and through the code
editor.
When you choose the design option, you can see that the sample text “Hello
World!” appears in the layout as you might expect. But what’s in the
underlying XML?
Let’s see by switching to the code editor.
The code editor
Switch to the code editor by clicking on the Code option at the top of the
editor. This shows you the layout’s underlying XML.
Let’s take a closer look at the code.
activity_main.xml has two elements
Below is the code from activity_main.xml that Android Studio generated for
us. We’ve left out some of the details you don’t need to think about just yet;
we’ll cover them in more detail through the rest of the book.
Here’s the code:
As you can see, the code contains two elements.
The first is a <…ConstraintLayout> element. This is a type of layout
element that tells Android how to display components on the device screen.
There are various types of layout available for you to use, and you’ll find
out more about these later in the book.
The most important element for now is the second element, the
<TextView>. This element is used to display text to the user, in this case
the text “Hello World!”
The key part of the code within the <TextView> element is the line
starting with android:text. This is a text attribute that describes the
text that should be displayed:
RELAX
Don’t worry if your layout code looks different from ours.
Android Studio may give you slightly different XML depending on
which version you’re using. You don’t need to worry about this,
because from the next chapter onward you’ll learn how to roll your own
layout code, and replace a lot of what Android Studio gives you.
We’ll change the text to something else after you’ve had a go at the
following exercise.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL
We know we’ve not shown you much Android code yet, but see if you
can guess what each line does in the layout XML below. We’ve
completed the first few to get you started.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>.XML. declaration at the top. of the file..
<LinearLayout Arranges.components linearly,.one. af.ter. anather..
xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android" Defines.a namespace.
xmlns:tools="http://schemas.android.com/tools"
android:layout_width="match_parent"
android:layout_height="match_parent"
android:orientation="vertical"
tools:context=".MainActivity">
<EditText
android:id="@+id/message"
android:layout_width="match_parent"
android:layout_height="wrap_content"
android:layout_margin="16dp"
android:hint="Enter your message here"
android:inputType="text" />
<Button
android:id="@+id/send"
android:layout_width="wrap_content"
android:layout_height="wrap_content"
android:layout_gravity="center_horizontal"
android:text="SEND" />
</LinearLayout>
This is what appears on the
screen when you run an apd with the above layout
11:23
My First App
Enter your message here
SEND
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL SOLUTION
We know we’ve not shown you much Android code yet, but see if you
can guess what each line does in the layout XML below. We’ve
completed the first few to get you started.
Update the text displayed in the layout
We want to change the text in activity_main.xml so that when we run the
app, it displays something other than “Hello World!” We can do this by
changing the text attribute in the layout’s <TextView> element:
The text attribute is defined inside the <TextView> element using the
code android:text. It specifies what text should be displayed, in this
case “Hello World!”
To update the text that’s displayed in the layout, simply change the value of
the text attribute from "Hello World!" to some other text, such as
"Pow!". The new code for the <TextView> element should look like
this:
That’s the only change you need to make in order to update the text. Let’s
see what happens when the code runs.
What the code does
Before we take the app for a test drive, let’s go through what the code does.
1. Android uses MainActivity.kt to create the activity object
MainActivity.
2. MainActivity specifies that it uses the layout activity_main.xml.
3. The layout displays the text “Pow!” in the center of the app on
the device.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: My layout code looks different from yours. Is that OK?
A: Yes, that’s fine. Android Studio may generate slightly different code
if you’re using a different version than us, but that doesn’t really matter.
From now on you’ll be learning how to create your own layout code,
and you’ll replace a lot of what Android Studio gives you.
Q: Am I right in thinking we’re hardcoding the text that’s
displayed?
A: Yes, purely so that you can see how to update text in the layout.
There’s a better way of displaying text values than hardcoding them in
the layouts, but you’ll have to wait for the next chapter to learn what
this is.
Q: The folders in my explorer pane look different from yours. Why
is that?
A: Android Studio lets you choose alternate views for how to display
the folder hierarchy, and it defaults to the Android view. We prefer the
Project view, as it reflects the underlying folder structure. You can
change the explorer to the Project view by clicking on the arrow at the
top of the explorer pane, and selecting the Project option.
Test Drive
Once you’ve edited the file, try running the app in the emulator again by
choosing the “Run ‘app’” command from the Run menu, or clicking on the
Run button. You should see that the app now says “Pow!” instead of “Hello
World!”
Congratulations! You’ve now built and updated your first app, and learned
how Android apps hang together in the process. We’ll build on this further
in the next chapter by creating an app you can interact with.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 1 under your belt and now you’ve added Android
basic concepts to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
Versions of Android have a version number, API level, and
code name.
Android Studio is based on IntelliJ IDEA. It interfaces with the
Android Software Development Kit (SDK), and the Gradle
build system.
A typical Android app is composed of activities, layouts, and
resource files.
Layouts describe what the app looks like. They’re held in the
app/src/main/res/layout folder.
Activities describe what the app does, and how it interacts with
the user. The activities you write are held in the
app/src/main/java folder.
AndroidManifest.xml contains information about the app itself.
It lives in the app/src/main folder.
An AVD is an Android Virtual Device. It runs in the Android
emulator and mimics a physical Android device.
An APK is an Android application package. It contains the
app’s bytecode, libraries, and resources. You install an app on a
device by installing the APK.
Android apps run in separate processes using the Android
runtime (ART).
The <TextView> element is used for displaying text.
The <TextView> element’s text attribute specifies what
text it should display.
Chapter 2. Building Interactive
Apps: Apps That Do Something
Most apps need to respond to the user in some way.
And in this chapter, you’ll see how you can make your apps more
interactive. You’ll discover how to add an OnClickListener to your activity
code so that your app can listen to what the user’s doing, and make an
appropriate response. You’ll find out more about how to design layouts,
and you’ll learn how each UI component you add to your layout is derived
from a common View ancestor. Along the way, you’ll discover why
String resources are so important for flexible, well-designed apps.
Let’s build a Beer Adviser app
When you create an Android app, you’re usually going to want it to do
something.
In this chapter, we’re going to show you how to create an app that the user
can interact with. We’ll create a Beer Adviser app where users can select
the color of beer they enjoy most, click a button, and get back a list of tasty
beers to try out.
Here’s how the app will be structured:
1. The layout activity_main.xml specifies what the app will look
like.
It includes three UI components:
A drop-down list of values called a spinner, which allows
the user to choose which color of beer they want
A button that, when clicked, will return a selection of
beers
A text view that displays the beers
2. The file strings.xml includes any String resources needed by
the layout.
The button’s label, for example, and the beer colors.
3. The activity MainActivity specifies how the app should interact
with the user.
It takes the beer color the user chooses, and uses this to display a
list of beers the user might be interested in.
Here’s what we’re going to do
So let’s get to work. There are a few steps you need to go through to build
the Beer Adviser app (we’ll tackle these throughout the rest of the chapter):
1. Create a project.
You’re creating a brand-new app, so you’ll need to create a new
project that includes an empty activity and a layout.
2. Update the layout.
Once you’ve set up the project, you need to amend the layout so
that it includes all the UI components the app needs.
3. Add String resources.
We’ll replace any hardcoded text with String resources so that
all the text that’s used by the app is held in a single file.
4. Make the button respond to clicks.
The layout only specifies the visuals. To make the button do
something when it’s clicked, you need to write some activity code.
5. Write the application logic.
You’ll add a new method to the activity, and use it to make sure
users get the right beer based on their selection.
Let’s start by creating the project.
Create the project
The steps for creating the new project are nearly identical to the ones we
used in the previous chapter:
1. Open Android Studio, close any open projects, and choose “New
Project” from the welcome screen. This starts the wizard you saw
in Chapter 1.
2. Make sure the Phone and Tablet option is selected, and choose the
Empty Activity option.
3. Enter a name of “Beer Adviser” and a package name of
“com.hfad.beeradviser” and accept the default save location. Make
sure that the language is set to Kotlin, and that the minimum SDK
is API 21 so that it will run on most Android devices. Then click
on the Finish button.
We’ve created a default activity and layout
When you click on the Finish button, Android Studio creates a new project
containing an activity named MainActivity.kt and a layout named
activity_main.xml, just as it did for the project we created in Chapter 1. We
need to modify these files to make the app look and behave the way we
want.
We’ll start by updating the layout file activity_main.xml to modify the app’s
appearance. We’ll build up the layout over the next few pages, but for now,
switch to the Project view of Android Studio’s explorer, go to the
app/src/main/res/layout folder, and open the file activity_main.xml. Then
switch to the code editor, and replace the entire code in activity_main.xml
with the following:
The above code features a linear layout (denoted by the
<LinearLayout> element) and a text view (denoted by the
<TextView> element). You’ll find out more about these elements later in
the chapter, but for now, all you need to know is that the linear layout is
used to arrange UI components in a vertical column, and the text view
displays the text “Beer types”.
Any changes you make to a layout’s XML are reflected in the design editor.
Switch to this now by clicking on the Design option at the top of the editor
pane.
A closer look at the design editor
As you learned in Chapter 1, the design editor presents you with a more
visual way of editing layout code than editing XML. It features two
different views of the layouts design. One shows you how the layout will
look on an actual device, and the other shows you a blueprint of its
structure:
To the left of the design editor is a palette that contains components you can
drag to the layout. You’ll use this on the next page to add a button to the
layout, which later in the chapter will be used to update the text that’s
displayed in the app.
Add a button using the design editor
To add a button to the layout, find the Button component in the palette,
click on it, and then drag it into the design editor so it’s positioned above
the text view. The button appears in the layout’s design:
Changes in the design editor are reflected in the XML
Dragging UI components to the layout like this is a convenient way of
updating the layout. If you switch to the code editor, you’ll see that adding
the button via the design editor has added some more code to the underlying
XML:
activity_main.xml has a new button
As you’ve just seen, the design editor has added a new <Button> element
to activity_main.xml. Its code looks like this:
<Button
 android:id="@+id/button"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:text="Button" />
A button in Androidville is a UI component the user can click to trigger an
action. The <Button> element includes attributes controlling its size and
appearance. These attributes aren’t unique to buttons—other UI
components such as text views have them too.
Buttons and text views are subclasses of the same
Android View class
There’s a very good reason why buttons and text views have attributes in
common—they both inherit from the same Android View class. You’ll find
out more about this as we go through the book, but for now, here are some
of the most common attributes:
android:id
This gives the component an identifying name so that the activity code can
access it and control its behavior:
 android:id="@+id/button"
android:layout_width, android:layout_height
These attributes specify the width and height of the component.
"wrap_content" means it should be just big enough for the content,
and "match_parent" means it should be as wide as the layout
containing it:
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
android:text
This tells Android what text the component should display, such as the text
that appears on a button:
 android:text="Button"
A closer look at the layout code
Let’s take a closer look at the layout code, and break it down so that you
can see what it’s actually doing (don’t worry if your code looks a little
different, just follow along):
The <LinearLayout> element
The first element in the layout code is the <LinearLayout>. This
element tells Android that the different UI components in the layout should
be displayed one after another in a single row or column.
You specify the orientation using the android:orientation attribute.
In this example we’re using:
android:orientation="vertical"
so the UI components are displayed in a single vertical column.
The <LinearLayout> element (on the previous page) contains two
further elements: a <Button> and a <TextView>.
The <Button> element
The first element is the <Button>:
...
<Button
 android:id="@+id/button"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:text="Button" />
...
Using a linear layout means that UI components are displayed in a
vertical column or a horizontal row.
As this is the first element inside the <LinearLayout>, it appears first in
the layout (at the top of the screen). It has a layout_width of
"match_parent", which makes it as wide as its parent element, the
<LinearLayout>. Its layout_height is "wrap_content“, which
means it should be just tall enough to display its text.
The <TextView> element
The final element inside the <LinearLayout> is the <TextView>:
...
<TextView
 android:id="@+id/brands"
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:text="Beer types" />
...
As this is the second element and we’ve set the <LinearLayout>
element’s orientation to "vertical", it’s displayed underneath the button
(the first element). Its layout_width and layout_height attributes
are both set to "wrap_content" so that it takes up just enough space to
contain its text.
You’ve seen how adding components to the design editor adds them to the
layout XML. The opposite applies too—any changes you make to the
layout XML are applied to the design. Let’s see this in action.
Let’s update the layout XML
We’ll update the layout by adding a new spinner component, and tweaking
the button and text view components that are already there. A spinner is a
drop-down list of values. When you click it, it expands to show you the list
so that you can pick a single value.
Update the activity_main.xml code with the following changes (highlighted
in bold):
The XML changes are reflected in the design
editor
Once you’ve changed the layout XML, switch to the design editor. Instead
of displaying a layout containing a button with a text view underneath it,
the design editor now shows a spinner, button, and text view centered
horizontally in a single column like this:
A spinner provides a drop-down list of values. It allows you to choose a
single value from a set of values.
All the UI components you add to layout files—such as buttons,
spinners, and text views—use the same or similar attributes because
they are all types of View. Behind the scenes, they all inherit from the
same Android View class.
NOTE
These UI components are often referred to as views because they inherit from the same
View class.
We’ve now added all the components to activity_main.xml that we need for
the Beer Adviser app’s layout. We still have more work to do, but let’s take
the app for a test drive so that we can see how it looks on a device.
Test Drive
Run the app by choosing the “Run ‘app’” command from the Run menu or
clicking on the Run button, and wait patiently for the app to load.
When the app appears on your device, notice that it displays an empty
spinner, button, and text view in a single column.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: You said you can add views through the design editor or by
editing the XML. Which approach is best?
A: It’s mostly a matter a personal preference. For simple layouts, we
prefer to update the underlying XML, but you’ll find out in Chapter 4
that some types of layout are easier to update if you use the design
editor.
Most of the time, we’re going to ask you to update the underlying XML
as this is the easiest way to make sure your code matches ours.
Q: Why did we replace the default layout code that Android Studio
provided for us?
A: There are a couple of reasons.
First, a linear layout is the most appropriate type of layout to use if you
want to arrange the components in a single row or column. This makes
it a good fit for the app we’re building in this chapter.
The second reason is that a linear layout is the simplest type of layout to
learn how to use. You’ll discover more advanced layouts later in the
book, but for now, we’re focusing on the basics.
Q: Why does the button show its text as uppercase?
A: It’s because the app’s default theme changes the button text to
uppercase by default. You’ll find out more about themes—and how to
override their behavior—in Chapter 8.
For now, you can stop the button text from being displayed as
uppercase by adding the following code to each <Button> element in
your layout:
android:textAllCaps="false"
There are warnings in the layout…
When you develop layouts in Android Studio, the IDE automatically checks
your code for errors, and alerts you to potential improvements. An easy way
of viewing any warnings or suggestions is to switch to the design editor
view of the layout, and check out the component tree panel. This panel is
usually located beneath the palette, and it displays a hierarchical tree of the
components in the layout.
If Android Studio has any suggestions for how to improve your code, you’ll
see a badge or icon to the right of the relevant component. We have warning
badges, for example, next to the find_beer and brands components. If
we hover the mouse cursor over each one, we can see messages warning us
about hardcoded text:
…because there’s hardcoded text
When we defined the layout, we hardcoded the text that needs to be
displayed in the text view and button components using code like this:
While this approach is fine when you’re just learning, hardcoding the text in
the layout isn’t the best approach.
Suppose you’ve created an app that’s a big hit on your local Google Play
Store. You don’t want to limit yourself to just one country or language—
you want to make it available internationally and for different languages.
But if you’ve hardcoded all of the text in your layout files, sending the app
global will be difficult.
It also makes it much harder to make app-wide changes to the text. Imagine
your boss asks you to change the wording in an app because the company’s
changed its name. If you’ve hardcoded all of the text, this means that you
might need to edit a whole host of files in order to change the text.
So what’s the alternative?
Put text in a String resource file
A better approach is to put the text values into a String resource file.
This makes it much easier to make app-wide changes to the text used in the
application. Instead of having to change hardcoded text values in a whole
host of different activity and layout files, you only need to edit the text in
the resource file.
This approach also makes it much easier to localize the app. Instead of
hardcoding the text in one language, you can provide separate String
resource files for each language you want to support. This enables the app
to switch the language that’s used in the app so that it matches the device
locale.
Android Studio helps you extract String resources
If you have a layout that contains hardcoded text, Android Studio provides
you with an easy way of extracting the text and adding it to a String
resource file. Simply click (or double-click) on each badge warning you
about the hardcoded text, then click on the Fix button to fix the problem.
NOTE
You might need to scroll down to see this button.
Let’s try this with one of the components in the layout. Make sure that
you’re using the design view of activity_main.xml, and click on the warning
badge next to the find_beer component.
You’ll be shown an explanation about why hardcoded text is a problem.
Scroll to the end of this explanation, then click on the Fix button:
Extract the String resource
When you click on the Fix button, the Extract Resource window appears.
This allows you to specify the name of the String resource, its value, and
the name of the String resource file. Make sure that the resource name is
“find_beer”, the file name is “strings.xml”, the source set is “main”, and the
values directory is checked. Then click on the OK button.
When you click on the OK button, Android Studio adds the find_beer
component’s hardcoded text to a String resource file named strings.xml,
and changes the layout’s XML so that it uses the String resource. We’ll
look at both of these changes, starting with the String resource file.
A String resource has been added to strings.xml
strings.xml is the app’s default String resource file, and Android Studio
automatically creates this file for you when you create a new project. Open
strings.xml now by opening it in Android Studio’s explorer: you’ll find
strings.xml in the app/src/main/res/values folder.
The file contents should look something like this:
<resources>
 <string name="app_name">Beer Adviser</string>
 <string name="find_beer">Find Beer</string>
</resources>
The above code describes two String resources, where each resource is a
name/value pair. The first resource is named app_name and has a value of
“Beer Adviser”, while the second is named find_beer and has a value of
“Find Beer”. The second resource was added when we extracted the
hardcoded text for the find_beer component:
We’ll look at String resources in more detail a few pages ahead, but for
now, let’s see what change was made to activity_main.xml.
activity_main.xml uses the String resource
When we told Android Studio to extract the hardcoded text, Android Studio
automatically updated the find_beer button in activity_main.xml so that
it uses the extracted String resource.
Here’s the updated code for the button:
As you can see, the find_beer button’s text attribute has been changed
to "@string/find_beer". So what does this mean?
Let’s start with the first part, @string. This is just a way of telling
Android to look up a text value from a String resource file. Here, it’s the
file strings.xml that you saw earlier.
The second part, find_beer, tells Android to look up the value of a
resource with the name find_beer. So "@string/find_beer" is
like saying “look up the String resource with the name find_beer,
and use the associated text value.”
You also can extract String resources manually
You’ve now learned what changes Android Studio makes to the code when
you ask it to extract hardcoded text into a String resource. You can also
make these changes yourself by directly updating the code in strings.xml
and activity_main.xml.
Let’s see how by changing the hardcoded “Beer types” text that’s used by
the brands component’s text attribute so that it uses a String
resource.
NOTE
In your own projects, it’s likely that you’ll just use the wizard. We’re showing you how
to manually edit the XML because we need to make sure that the code you create
matches ours, and updating the XML is the best way of doing this.
Add and use a new String resource
We’ll start by creating a new String resource named brands. Open
strings.xml (located in the app/src/main/res/values folder), and add a new
line for the String resource so that it includes the change shown here (in
bold):
Once you’ve added the String resource, open activity_main.xml and
update the code for the brands text view so that it uses the new resource.
Update the code so that it includes the change shown here (in bold):
There’s a summary about using String resources on the next page. After
that, we’ll take the app for a test drive.
STRING RESOURCES UP CLOSE
strings.xml is the default resource file used to hold name/value pairs of
Strings so that they can be referenced throughout the app. It has the
following format:
There are two things that allow Android to recognize strings.xml as
being a String resource file:
The file is held in the folder app/src/main/res/values.
XML files held in this folder contain values that can be used
throughout the app, such as Strings and colors.
The file has a <resources> element, which contains one
or more <string> elements.
The format of the file itself indicates that it’s a resource file
containing Strings. The <resources> element tells
Android that the file contains resources, and the <string>
element identifies each String resource.
This means that you don’t need to call the String resource file
strings.xml; if you want, you can call it something else, or split the
Strings into multiple files.
Each name/value pair takes the form:
<string name="string_name">string_value</string>
where string_name is the identifier of the String, and
string_value is the String value itself.
A layout can retrieve the value of the String using:
Test Drive
Now that we’ve updated the layout to use String resources instead of
hardcoded text values, let’s run the app to see how it’s looking. Run the app
as before by choosing the “Run ‘app’” command from the Run menu.
When we run the app, the text that’s displayed on the button and in the text
view has been updated so that it uses the String values we added to
strings.xml:
RELAX
When you rerun the app, don’t worry if Android Studio asks if you
want to terminate the process “app”.
It simply wants to know if it can exit the old version of the app that’s
currently running so it can run the new one. Just click on the Terminate
option, and wait for your app to load.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Do I have to put my text values in a String resource file?
A: It’s not mandatory, but Android gives you warning messages if you
hardcode text values. Using a String resource file might seem like a
lot of effort at first, but it makes things like localization much easier.
It’s also easier to use String resources to start off with, rather than
patching them in afterward.
Q: How does separating out the String values help with
localization?
A: Suppose you want the application to be in English by default, but in
French if the device language is set to French. Rather than hardcode
different languages into the app, you can have one String resource
file for English text, and another resource file for French text.
Q: How does the app know which String resource file to use?
A: Put the default English String resource file in the
app/src/main/res/values folder as normal, and the French one in a new
folder named app/src/main/res/values-fr. If the device is set to French,
it will use the String resources in the app/src/main/res/values-fr
folder. If the device is set to any other language, it will use the String
resources in app/src/main/res/values instead.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL
The code below (a layout file and String resource file) is from an app
that’s used to generate random numbers. Complete the code so it
produces the output shown below.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL SOLUTION
The code below (a layout file and String resource file) is from an app
that’s used to generate random numbers. Complete the code so it
produces the output shown below.
Add values to the spinner
The app’s current layout includes a spinner, but when we click on it, it’s
empty. This is because we haven’t yet told the spinner what values it should
display. Each time you use a spinner in the layout code, you must specify an
associated list of values, or it won’t include any, and Android Studio may
give you warning messages.
You specify a list of values for a spinner in a similar way to how you
specify the text that’s displayed on a button or in a text view: by adding a
resource to strings.xml and referring to the resource in the layout. Instead of
specifying a single value in a String resource, however, you add multiple
Strings to an array resource, and use this array for the spinner’s list of
values.
Resources are noncode assets, such as images or Strings, used by the
app.
Adding an array resource is similar to adding a String
As you already know, you add a String resource to strings.xml using:
<string name="string_name">string_value</string>
where string_name is the name of the String, and string_value
is the value that’s displayed in the app.
To add an array of Strings to a String resource file, you use the
following syntax:
where string_array_name is the name of the array, and
string_value1, string_value2, and string_value3 are the
individual String values that make up the array.
In this app, we want to add a String array resource where each item in
the array is a beer color. We’ll then attach this array to the spinner so that
when the user clicks on the spinner, the beer colors will be displayed.
Let’s add the new String array.
Add the string-array to strings.xml
To add the String array, open up strings.xml, and add the code below (in
bold). This adds a string-array resource named beer_colors that
we’ll attach to the spinner:
Get the spinner to display the array’s values
A layout references a String array resource using similar syntax to how it
would retrieve the value of a String resource. Rather than use:
you use the syntax:
where array_name is the name of the array.
Let’s use this in the layout. Go to the layout file activity_main.xml and add
an entries attribute to the spinner like this (in bold):
We’ll show you the full code for activity_main.xml on the next page.
The full code for activity_main.xml
Below is the entire code for activity_main.xml. Make sure the code for this
file includes all of the code shown here.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
Let’s see what impact the changes have had on the app. Run the app, and
you should get something like this:
So far, we’ve created a layout (activity_main.xml) that includes a spinner, a
button, and a text view. These views use a String resource file
(strings.xml) for their String and array values.
The next thing we need to do is get the app to update the brands text view
each time the user clicks the button.
We need to make the app interactive
The Beer Adviser app has the correct appearance and includes all the views
we need, but it doesn’t yet provide any beer recommendations. To make the
app interactive, we need to make the app do something when the user clicks
the find_beer button. We want the app to behave something like this:
1. The user chooses a beer color from the spinner and clicks the
button.
2. Code in MainActivity responds to the button being clicked.
3. MainActivity passes the selected beer color to a method we’ll
create named getBeers.
The getBeers() method finds matching brands for the beer
color.
4. MainActivity updates the brands text view so that it displays
the list of recommended beers on the device.
To make the app respond to the user in this way, we need to update the code
in MainActivity.kt, as this is the code that’s responsible for how the app
behaves. Android Studio created this file for us when we created the
project, so let’s take a look at the current code.
What the MainActivity code looks like
Android Studio created MainActivity.kt for us when we created the project.
Open this file now (if it’s not already open) by going to the
app/src/main/java folder and double-clicking on it.
Here is the code for MainActivity.kt that Android Studio created for us:
The above code is all you need to create a basic activity. As you can see, it’s
a class that extends AppCompatActivity, and overrides its
onCreate() method.
All activities (not just this one) have to extend an activity class such as
AppCompatActivity. You’ll find out more about this in Chapter 5, but
for now, all you need to know is that when a class extends
AppCompatActivity, it transforms your plain old Kotlin class into a
full-fledged, card-carrying Android activity.
All activities must also implement the onCreate() method. This method
gets called when the activity object gets created, and it’s used to perform
basic setup such as what layout the activity is associated with. This is done
via a call to setContentView(). In the example above, the code:
setContentView(R.layout.activity_main)
tells Android that this activity uses activity_main.xml as its layout.
You now know what the current MainActivity code does. So how do
we get it to respond when the user clicks the find_beer button?
A button can listen for on-click events…
Each time the user does something in your app it’s called an event. There
are many different event types in Androidville, such as clicking a button,
swiping the screen, or pressing a hardware key on the device.
In this app, we want to know when the user clicks on the find_beer
button so that we can get the app to do something in response. We can get
the app to listen for the button’s on-click event so that each time it occurs,
we can update the text in the brands text view.
You can make a button respond to on-click events by adding an
OnClickListener to the button.
…using an OnClickListener
You can make the app listen for a button’s on-click events by adding an
OnClickListener to the button. Each time the button is clicked, the
OnClickListener “hears” the click, and responds to it.
You specify what action the OnClickListener should take by passing it
a block of code—a lambda—that specifies what should happen when the
button is clicked.
NOTE
If your Kotlin lambda knowledge feels a little rusty, we suggest that you refer to Head
First Kotlin.
Here, we want to update the brands text view each time the find_beer
button is clicked. This means that we need to add an OnClickListener
to the find_beer button, and pass it a lambda that tells it how to update
the text view.
Let’s find out how to do this.
Get a reference to the button…
To add an OnClickListener to the find_beer button, you first need
to get a reference to the button in the activity code. You do this using a
method named findViewById.
The findViewById method lets you get a reference to any view in the
layout that has an ID. Simply specify the view’s type and ID, and the
method returns a reference to it.
In this app, we want to get a reference to the button with an ID of
“find_beer”, so we use the code:
…and call its setOnClickListener method
Once you have a reference to the button, you can add an
OnClickListener to it by calling its setOnClickListener()
method using code like this:
Notice that we’re adding the OnClickListener code to
MainActivity’s onCreate() method. onCreate() runs when the
activity gets created, so adding the call to setOnClickListener()
here means that the find_beer button will be able to start responding to
clicks as soon as possible.
Now that we’ve added an OnClickListener to the button, let’s make it
do something when the button is clicked.
Pass a lambda to the setOnClickListener
method
You make the button do something when it’s clicked by passing a lambda to
its setOnClickListener() method. The lambda specifies what you
want to happen each time the button is clicked.
So if you want the button to update some text or perform some other action,
you put the code to do this in the lambda:
We ultimately want the activity to display a list of beer recommendations,
but for now, let’s make the button update the brands text view with the
value that’s selected in the beer_color spinner. This will let us test that
the button’s OnClickListener works before we focus on getting some
real beer advice.
In order to do this, there are two more things we need to know: how to edit
the text in a text view, and how to get the value that’s selected in the
spinner.
How to edit a text view’s text
As you’ve already learned, you change the text that’s displayed in a text
view by updating its text attribute in the layout XML. To update the text
using activity code, we can therefore get a reference to the text view and
update its text property.
To edit the text that’s displayed in the brands text view to say “Gottle of
geer”, for example, you could use the following code:
In the Beer Adviser app, we want to update the text view’s text property
to the value that the user has selected in the beer_color spinner. To do
this, we need to find out how to get this value.
How to get the spinner’s value
You can get the current value in a spinner using its selectedItem
property. To get the current value from the beer_color spinner, for
example, you would use the code:
The selectedItem property can hold any type of value, not just
Strings, so you need to convert its value before you can use it.
In the Beer Adviser app, for example, we know that the beer_color
spinner holds an array of String values, so the item the user selects must
be a String. To use this value, we therefore need to convert it to a
String using code like this:
You could also use it in a String template using the following code
instead:
val color = "${beerColor.selectedItem}"
You now know enough to make the find_beer button get the
beer_color spinner’s value, and display it in the brands text view.
Before we show you the full code, see if you can piece it together yourself
by having a go at the following exercise.
Pool Puzzle
Your job is to take code snippets from the pool and place them into the
blank lines in MainActivity’s onCreate() method. You may not use
the same code snippet more than once, and you won’t need to use all the
snippets. Your goal is to make the find_beer button respond to clicks by
getting it to update the brands text view with the value selected in the
beer_color spinner.
override fun onCreate(savedInstanceState: Bundle?) {
 super.onCreate(savedInstanceState)
 setContentView(R.layout.activity_main)
 val findBeer = findViewById<Button>(R.id.find_beer)
 findBeer............................{
 val beerColor = findViewById<Spinner>
(....................)
 val color = beerColor.
 val brands = findViewById<............>(R.id.brands)
 brands.........= "Beer color is........................."
 }
}
NOTE
Note: each thing from the pool can only be used once!
Pool Puzzle Solution
Your job is to take code snippets from the pool and place them into the
blank lines in MainActivity’s onCreate() method. You may not use
the same code snippet more than once, and you won’t need to use all the
snippets. Your goal is to make the find_beer button respond to clicks by
getting it to update the brands text view with the value selected in the
beer_color spinner.
The updated code for MainActivity.kt
We want to update MainActivity so that the find_beer button
responds to clicks. Each time the button is clicked, we want to update the
text that’s displayed in the brands text view so that it includes the beer
color the user selects in the spinner.
Below is the updated MainActivity.kt code featuring the code you pieced
together in the previous exercise. Update MainActivity.kt to include these
changes (in bold):
Before we take the code for a test drive, let’s go through what the code does
when it runs.
What happens when you run the code
When we run the app, choose a beer color, and click on the Find Beer
button, the following things happen:
1. The user chooses a beer color from the spinner and clicks on
the Find Beer button.
2. The button’s OnClickListener hears that it’s been clicked.
3. The OnClickListener code in MainActivity retrieves the
currently selected value of the spinner (in this case Amber).
4. It then updates the text property of the text view to reflect that
the user has chosen Amber in the spinner.
Test Drive
Make sure you’ve updated MainActivity.kt, and then run the app.
When we choose a beer color from the spinner and click on the Find Beer
button, the value we selected is displayed in the text view.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: You said that we get a reference to the brands text view by
passing the findViewById method a value of R.id.brands.
You also said that we tell MainActivity to use activity_main.xml
for its layout by passing the setContentView method a value of
R.layout.activity_main.
R.id.brands and R.layout.activity_main both refer to
something called R. So what’s R?
A: R refers to R.java. It’s a special file that’s automatically generated
when you build the app. Android uses R.java to keep track of any
resources used within the app such as layouts, String resources, and
views.
When you pass the findViewById method a value of
R.id.brands, Android looks up the brands ID from R, and uses
this to return a reference to the brands view. Similarly, when you pass
the setContentView method a value of
R.layout.activity_main, Android looks up the correct layout
from R, and assigns it to the activity.
You don’t change any of the code in R.java yourself: Android Studio
automatically generates it for you.
Add the getBeers() method
Now that we know that the find_beer button can respond to clicks, let’s
change its behavior so that each time the user clicks the button, it provides
some real beer advice based on the value that’s selected in the spinner.
We’ll do this by adding a new getBeers() method to MainActivity.kt,
which we can then call in the button’s OnClickListener code.
The getBeers() method is pure Kotlin code. It has one String
parameter for the beer color, and returns a List<String> of beer
suggestions. Add the getBeers() method (shown below in bold) to
MainActivity.kt:
Next, we need to update the lambda that’s passed to the find_beer
button’s setOnClickListener() method. We’ll make it pass the
selected beer color from the spinner to the getBeers() method, and
update the brands text view with its return value.
See if you can piece together the code to do this by having a go at the
following exercise.
Activity Magnets
Somebody used fridge magnets to complete the code for MainActivity,
but a freak kitchen whirlwind has dislodged some of the magnets. Can you
piece the code back together again?
The code needs to call the getBeers() method, and display each item it
returns in the brands text view. Each item should be displayed on a new
line.
Activity Magnets Solution
Somebody used fridge magnets to complete the code for MainActivity,
but a freak kitchen whirlwind has dislodged some of the magnets. Can you
piece the code back together again?
The code needs to call the getBeers() method, and display each item it
returns in the brands text view. Each item should be displayed on a new
line.
The full code for MainActivity.kt
Below is the full code for MainActivity. Apply the changes shown in
bold to MainActivity.kt.
Before we take the code for a final test drive, let’s go through what the code
does when it runs.
What happens when you run the code
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. When the user clicks on the Find Beer button, the button’s
OnClickListener hears the click.
2. The OnClickListener code in MainActivity calls the getBeers()
method, passing in the beer color selected in the spinner.
The getBeers() method returns a list of beers, which
MainActivity saves in a separate variable.
3. MainActivity formats the list of beers and uses it to set the text
property in the text view.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
Once you’ve made the changes to the app, go ahead and run it.
When we try selecting different beer types and clicking on the Find Beer
button, the app displays a selection of suitable beers. We get one set of
beers when we choose the Light option, and another selection when we
choose the Amber option.
Congratulations! You’ve now finished writing your first interactive Android
app, and learned how to make the layout’s views respond to the user.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 2 under your belt and now you’ve added building
interactive Android apps to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
The <Button> element is used to add a button.
The <Spinner> element is used to add a spinner, which is a
drop-down list of values.
All the UI components you add to a layout are types of view.
They inherit from the Android View class.
strings.xml is a String resource file. It’s used to separate out
text values from the layouts and activities, and supports
localization.
Add a String to strings.xml using:
 <string name="name">
 Value
 </string>
Reference a String in the layout using:
 "@string/name"
Add an array of String values to strings.xml using:
 <string-array name="array_name">
 <item>string1</item>
 ...
 </string-array>
Reference a string-array in the layout using:
 "@array/array_name"
Use the findViewById method to get a reference to a view
by its ID.
Make a button respond to clicks by calling its
setOnClickListener method.
The setOnClickListener method takes one parameter—
a lambda—which describes what should happen when the
button is clicked.
Change the text that’s displayed in a view by updating its
text property.
Get the selected item in a spinner using its selectedItem
property.
The selectedItem property can hold any type of value, so
you need to convert its value before you can use it.
Chapter 3. Layouts: Being a
layout
We’ve only scratched the surface of using layouts.
So far, you’ve seen how to arrange views in a simple linear layout, but
there’s so much more that layouts can do. In this chapter we’ll go a little
deeper and show you how layouts really work. You’ll learn how to finetune your linear layouts. You’ll discover how to use frame layouts and
scroll views. And by the end of the chapter, you’ll learn that even though
they might look a little different, all layouts—and the views you add to
them—have more in common than you might think.
It all starts with a layout
As you already know, layout files are written in XML, and they let you
define what your app looks like.
Each time you write a layout, you need to do three things:
1. Specify the type of layout.
You tell Android how you want any views (such as buttons and
text views) to be arranged by specifying a type of layout. A linear
layout, for example, arranges views in a linear column or row, one
after another.
<LinearLayout ...>
</LinearLayout>
2. Specify the views.
Each layout contains one or more views, which your app uses to
display information or interact with the user.
<Button
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:text="Click me" />
3. Tell an activity to use the layout.
You tell Android which activity uses the layout you’ve just defined
by adding Kotlin code like this to the activity.
setContentView(R.layout.activity_main)
Android has different types of layout
Android has different types of layout, and each one has its own policy about
how its views are arranged. A linear layout, for example, will always lay
views out in a linear row or column, while a frame layout stacks its views,
one on top of another. Which type of layout you use depends on how you
want views to be arranged on the device screen.
Use the best layout for your screen design
All the apps you’ve seen so far have used linear layouts to arrange views in
a single column. In this chapter, we’re going to take a deeper look at linear
layouts, and introduce you to two other types: a frame layout and a scroll
view.
Let’s start with linear layouts.
Let’s build a linear layout
We’re going to use a linear layout to build the layout shown below. A linear
layout is a good choice here, because the views are arranged in a single
column. As you already know, a linear layout arranges views one after
another in a vertical column or a horizontal row.
The layout is composed of two editable text views (text views that allow
you to enter text) and a button. Here’s what we want the layout to look like:
Create a new project
We’ll use a new Android Studio project for the linear layout app.
Create a new project using the same steps you used in the previous
chapters. Choose the Empty Activity option, enter a name of “Linear
Layout Example” and a package name of “com.hfad.linearlayoutexample”,
and accept the default save location. Make sure the language is set to Kotlin
and the minimum SDK is API 21 so that it will run on most Android
devices.
How to define a linear layout
As you already know, you define a linear layout using a
<LinearLayout> element. The code looks like this:
The <LinearLayout> element contains various different attributes that
it needs to specify its appearance and behavior.
The first is xmlns:android. This defines a namespace named
android, and it needs to be set to
"http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android" as above.
Defining this namespace gives your layout access to the elements and
attributes that your layout needs, and you need to define it in every layout
file you create.
The next two attributes are android:layout_width and
android:layout_height, and these specify how wide and high you
want the layout to be. These attributes are mandatory for all types of layout
and view.
You can set android:layout_width and
android:layout_height to "wrap_content",
"match_parent", or a specific size such as 8dp—that’s 8 densityindependent pixels. "wrap_content" means that you want the layout to
be just big enough to hold all of the views inside it, and
"match_parent" means that you want the layout to be as big as its
parent—in this case, as big as the device screen minus any padding (there’s
more about padding a few pages ahead). You will usually set the layout
width and height to "match_parent".
The next attribute sets the linear layout’s orientation. We’ll look at options
for this attribute next.
SERIOUS CODING
Some devices create very sharp images by using very tiny pixels. Other
devices are cheaper to produce because they have fewer, larger pixels.
You use density-independent pixels (dp) to avoid creating interfaces
that are overly small on some devices, and overly large on others. A
measurement in density-independent pixels is roughly the same size
across all devices.
You set text sizes using scalable pixels (sp). Scalable pixels are like
density-independent pixels except they’re used for fonts.
Orientation can be vertical or horizontal
You specify the direction in which you wish to arrange views using the
android:orientation attribute.
You arrange views vertically in a single column using:
android:orientation="vertical"
and you arrange views horizontally in a single row with:
android:orientation="horizontal"
If the orientation is horizontal, the order in which the views are arranged
depends on the device language settings.
If the device language is set to one that is read from left to right, such as
English, the views are displayed in a horizontal row from left to right like
this:
If the language on the device is set to one that’s read from right to left
instead, like Arabic, you can choose to display the views from right to left,
so that the first view appears against the rightmost edge of the layout. You
enable this feature by including a property named supportsRtl in a file
named AndroidManifest.xml file, and setting it to "true":
NOTE
supportsRtl means “supports right to left”.
Before we look at what other attributes you can use with linear layouts, let’s
take a quick detour to find out more about AndroidManifest.xml.
ANATOMY OF ANDROIDMANIFEST.XML
Every Android app must include a file called AndroidManifest.xml,
which lives in the app/src/main folder of your project. The
AndroidManifest.xml file contains essential information about your app
that the Android operating system, the Android build tools, and the
Google Play Store need to know about. This includes the app’s package
name, details of any activities, and any permissions the app requires.
Android Studio creates the AndroidManifest.xml file for you when you
create your project.
A typical AndroidManifest.xml looks like this:
Android Studio usually adds the supportsRtl property to
AndroidManifest.xml automatically, so that your app supports right-toleft languages by default.
Use padding to add space to the layout’s
edges
Once you’ve specified the type of layout you want to use, you can
optionally use one or more padding attributes to add some extra space
between each of the layout’s edges and its contents. The following code, for
example, uses the android:padding attribute to add 16dp to each edge:
If you want to add different amounts of padding to different edges, you can
specify the edges individually. The following code, for example, adds
padding of 32dp to the top of the layout, and 16dp to the other edges:
The android:paddingStart attribute adds padding to the start edge
of the layout. For left-to-right languages (such as English), the start edge is
on the left, while if the device language is set to one that’s read from right
to left—and the app supports right-to-left languages—the start edge is on
the right.
The android:paddingEnd attribute adds padding to the end edge of
the layout. This is on the right for left-to-right languages, and on the left for
right-to-left languages (where the app supports this feature).
If you want to apply the same amount of padding to the horizontal or
vertical edges, you can also use android:paddingHorizontal and
android:paddingVertical. These attributes add padding to the
horizontal and vertical edges of the layout, respectively.
Now that you’ve learned how to add padding to a linear layout, let’s add
some to the layout we’re building.
The layout code so far
In the app, we’re going to use a linear layout with a vertical orientation, and
add padding of 16dp to each edge so that there’s a bit of space between the
layout’s edges and its contents.
Open activity_main.xml, and replace its code so that it matches the code
below:
We’ve now defined an empty linear layout; let’s go ahead and add some
views to it.
Padding puts extra space between the layout’s edges and its contents.
You can also use padding with views. This adds extra space between the
view’s edges and its contents
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: I see the above layout code includes an extra tools namespace.
What’s that for?
A: The tools namespace includes a set of attributes that are used by
the tools included in Android Studio. It doesn’t change the appearance
of your app on the device screen: it’s just there to make your coding life
a little easier.
An edit text lets you enter text
The linear layout needs to display a button and two editable text views
(which are used to enter text). You already know how to use buttons, so
before we update the layout, let’s find out how to include an editable text
view.
An editable text view is a type of text view that lets you input text. You add
one to your layout using an <EditText> element, and the code looks like
this:
<EditText
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:hint="To"
 android:inputType="text" />
The above code creates an editable text view that’s as wide as its parent,
and just high enough to hold its contents.
The android:hint attribute is used to define hint text. This is displayed
when the editable text view is empty, and it gives users a hint as to what
sort of text they should enter. In the above example, we’ve hardcoded the
hint text, but in the real world you’d want to include this as a String
resource instead.
The android:inputType attribute specifies what type of data you
expect the user to enter so that Android can provide the correct keyboard
type. In the above example, we’re using:
android:inputType="text"
which lets user enter a single line of text. Here are some more useful input
types you might want to use:
Value What it does
text Lets the user enter a single line of text.
textMultiLine Lets the user enter multiple lines of text.
phone Provides a phone number keypad.
textPassword Displays a text entry keypad, and your input is concealed.
You can find out more in the online Android developer documentation at
https://developer.android.com/training/keyboard-input/style.
textCapSentences Capitalizes the first word of a sentence.
Now that you’ve learned how to use editable text views, let’s add views to
the layout code in the app we’re building.
Add views to the layout XML
When you define a linear layout, you list views in the layout in the order
you want them to display.
In the app we’re building, we want to show two editable text views with a
button underneath. The layout code looks like this, so update the code for
activity_main.xml to include these changes (in bold):
Those are all the views the layout needs. So what’s next?
Make a view streeeeetch by adding weight
All of the views in the current layout take up just as much vertical space as
they need for their content. But what we really want is to make the Message
edit text stretch to take up any vertical space in the layout that’s not being
used by the other views like this:
To do this, we need to allocate some weight to the Message area. Allocating
weight to a view is a way of telling it to stretch to take up extra space in the
layout.
You assign weight to a view using:
android:layout_weight="number"
where number is some number greater than 0.
When you allocate weight to a view, the layout first makes sure that each
view has enough space for its content: each button has space for its text,
each edit text has space for its hint, and so on. Once it’s done that, the
layout takes any extra space and divides it proportionally between the views
with a weight of 1 or greater.
Let’s see how to apply this to the layout we’re building.
How to add weight to one view
We need the Message edit text to take up any extra space in the layout that’s
not used by either of the other two views. To do this, we’ll set its
android:layout_weight attribute to 1. As this is the only view in the
layout with a weight value, this will make the text field stretch vertically to
fill the remainder of the screen.
Here’s the code; update activity_main.xml to include the changes (in bold):
Giving the Message edit text a weight of 1 means that it takes up all of the
extra space that’s not used by the other views in the layout. This is because
neither of the other two views has been allocated any weight in the layout
XML.
In this example, we only need to give a weight to a single view. Before we
update the layout further, let’s see what happens when we need to assign
weight to multiple views.
How to add weight to multiple views
When you assign weight to multiple views, the linear layout uses the weight
you assign to each view to work out what proportion of the remaining space
each view should take up.
As an example, suppose we give the To edit text a weight of 1, and the
Message edit text a weight of 2, like this:
<LinearLayout ... >
 <EditText
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="0dp"
 android:layout_weight="1"
 android:hint="To"
 android:inputType="text" />

 <EditText
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="0dp"
 android:layout_weight="2"
 android:hint="Message"
 android:inputType="textMultiLine" />

 <Button
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:text="Send" />
</LinearLayout>
The linear layout spots that the To and Message editable text views have
weights, and it uses these to work out how much space each view should
take up.
It starts by adding together the android:layout_weight attributes for
each view. In this example, the To and Message views have weights of 1
and 2 respectively, giving a total of 3.
The proportion of extra space taken up by each view is the view’s weight
divided by the total weight. The To view has a weight of 1, so this means it
will take up 1/3 of the remaining space in the layout. The Message view has
a weight of 2, so it will take up 2/3 of the remaining space.
Now that you’ve learned how to use weight, let’s continue to update the
layout.
This is just an example; we're
not really going to change the layout so it looks like this.
11:02
Linear Layout Example
To
The To view has a weight
of I, so it takes up 1/3
of the extra space.
Message
SEND
The Message view has
a weight of 2, so it
takes up 2/3 of the
extra space.
The gravity attribute controls the position of
a view’s contents
The next thing we’ll do is move the hint text that’s displayed inside the
Message edit text. At the moment, it’s centered vertically inside the view.
We want to change it so that the text appears at the top of the edit text field,
and we can achieve this using the android:gravity attribute.
The android:gravity attribute lets you specify how you want to
position the contents of a view inside the view—for example, how you want
to position text inside a text view. If you want a view’s contents to appear at
the top of the view, as we do here, we can set its android:gravity
attribute to "top" like this:
android:gravity="top"
We’ll add an android:gravity attribute to the Message edit text so
that the hint text moves to the top of the view. Here’s the code; update
activity_main.xml to include the change (in bold):
You’ll find a list of other values you can use with the android:gravity
attribute on the next page.
Values you can use with the android:gravity
attribute
Here are some more of the values you can use with the
android:gravity attribute. Add the attribute to your view, and set its
value to one of the values below:
android:gravity="value"
top Puts the view’s contents at the top of the view.
bottom Puts the view’s contents at the bottom of the view.
start Puts the view’s contents at the start of the view.
end Puts the view’s contents at the end of the view.
center_vertical Centers the view’s contents vertically.
center_horizontal Centers the view’s contents horizontally.
center Centers the view’s contents vertically and horizontally.
fill_vertical Makes the view’s contents fill the view vertically.
fill_horizontal Makes the view’s contents fill the view horizontally.
fill Makes the view’s contents fill the view vertically and horizontally.
You can also apply multiple gravities to a view by separating each value
with a “|”. To sink a view’s contents to the bottom-end corner, for example,
you’d use:
android:gravity="bottom|end"
Now that you know how to position a view’s contents using gravity, have a
go at the following exercise on the next page.
android:gravity lets you say where you want the view’s contents to
appear inside the view.
Layout Magnets
Somebody used fridge magnets to create a linear layout that, when run,
produces the output below. Unfortunately, a passing sharknado has
dislodged some of the magnets. Can you piece the code back together
again?
NOTE
Hint: You won’t need to use all of the magnets.
Layout Magnets Solution
Somebody used fridge magnets to create a linear layout that, when run,
produces the output below. Unfortunately, a passing sharknado has
dislodged some of the magnets. Can you piece the code back together
again?
The story so far
So far, we’ve added three views to the linear layout, and adjusted their
position by adding layout_weight and gravity attributes to the
Message edit text. These attributes mean that the edit text uses up any extra
space that’s not being used by either of the other views, and its hint text is
displayed at the top of the view:
Our linear layout is nearly complete, but there are just two more changes
we’re going to make.
1. Move the Send button to the end edge.
For left-to-right languages, this will move the button over to the
right.
2. Add more space between the Message edit text and the top of
the button.
Let’s see how to do this, starting with moving the button to the end.
layout-gravity controls the position of a view
within a layout
To move the button to the end edge of the layout, we’ll add an
android:layout_gravity attribute to the button.
The android:layout_gravity attribute lets you specify where you
want a view in a linear layout to appear in its enclosing space. You can use
it to push a view to the right, for instance, or center the view horizontally.
To move the Send button to the end edge of the layout, we’ll set the
android:layout_gravity attribute to "end" using code like this:
<Button
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:layout_gravity="end"
 android:text="Send" />
Linear layouts have two attributes that sound similar to one another,
gravity and layout_gravity.
Previously, we used the android:gravity attribute to position the
Message hint text inside an edit text. This is because the
android:gravity attribute lets you say where you want a view’s
contents to appear.
android:layout_gravity deals with the placement of the view
itself, and lets you control where views appear in their available space. In
our case, we want the view to move to the end of its available space, so
we’re using:
android:layout_gravity="end"
Take a look at the next page, and you’ll see a list of some of the other
values you can use with the android:layout_gravity attribute.
More values you can use with the
android:layout-gravity attribute
Here are some of the values you can use with the
android:layout_gravity attribute. Add the attribute to your view,
and set its value to one of the values below:
android:layout_gravity="value"
Value What it does
top, bottom, start, end Puts the view at the top, bottom, start, or end of its
available space.
center_vertical, center_ho
rizontal
Centers the view vertically or horizontally in its available
space.
center Centers the view vertically and horizontally in its available
space.
fill_vertical, fill_horizo
ntal
Grows the view so that it fills its available space vertically
or horizontally.
fill Grows the view so that it fills its available space vertically
and horizontally.
You can assign multiple values to a view’s android:layout_gravity
attribute by separating each value with a “|”. To move a view to the
bottom-end corner of its available space, for example, you’d use the code:
android:layout_gravity="bottom|end"
Now that you know how change a view’s position using the
android:layout_gravity attribute, let’s find out how to add more
space between views.
android:layout_gravity lets you say where you want views to appear in
their available space.
android:layout_gravity deals with the placement of the view itself,
whereas android:gravity controls the view’s contents.
Use margins to add space between views
When you position views using a linear layout, the layout doesn’t leave
much space between them. You can increase the amount of space around a
view by adding one or more margins to it.
Suppose you have two views in a linear layout—an edit text that’s
positioned above a button. If you wanted to increase the space between the
two views, you could add a margin of 40dp to the top of the button using
the android:layout_marginTop attribute like this:
Here’s a list of the types of margin you can use to give your views extra
space. Add the attribute to the view, and set its value to the size of margin
you want:
android:attribute="8dp"
Attribute What it does
layout_marginTop Adds extra space to the top of the view.
layout_marginBottom Adds extra space to the bottom of the view.
layout_marginStart Adds extra space to the start of the view.
layout_marginEnd Adds extra space to the end of the view.
layout_margin Adds equal space to each side of the view.
layout_marginVertical, layo
ut_marginHorizontal
Adds equal space to the vertical (top and bottom) or
horizontal (start and end) edges of the view.
The full linear layout code
Now that you know a view’s layout_gravity and margin attributes,
let’s use them in the linear layout code to reposition the button and add
some space to its top edge. Here’s the full code for activity_main.xml;
update the code to include the changes below (in bold):
We’ve now finished writing the linear layout code, so let’s take it for a test
drive.
Test Drive
Once you’ve made the changes to your app, go ahead and run it.
The app displays a linear layout featuring three views: two editable text
views and a button. The views are displayed in a vertical column. The To
view appears at the top, the Send button is displayed in the bottom end
corner, and the Message view takes up any extra space, allowing for a
margin of 40dp at the top edge of the button.
Now that you know how to create a linear layout, and control how its views
are displayed, have a go at the exercise on the next page.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Could I have used a paddingTop attribute with the button
instead of layout_marginTop? Would that have had the same
effect?
A: You can use padding attributes such as paddingTop with views,
but it has a different effect. As you’ve seen, layout_marginTop
increases the amount of space above the view. paddingTop, however,
increases the height of the view by adding extra space inside it:
BE the Layout
The code below describes a complete linear layout. Your job is to play
like you’re the layout, and say which screen (A or B) the layout will
produce when run.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<LinearLayout
 xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 xmlns:tools="http://schemas.android.com/tools"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="match_parent"
 android:orientation="vertical"
 android:padding="16dp"
 tools:context=".MainActivity">
 <Button
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="0dp"
 android:layout_weight="1"
 android:layout_gravity="center_horizontal"
 android:text="Hello!" />
 <Button
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="0dp"
 android:layout_weight="1"
 android:gravity="center_horizontal"
 android:text="Goodbye!" />
</LinearLayout>
BE the Layout Solution
The code below describes a complete linear layout. Your job is to play
like you’re the layout, and say which screen (A or B) the layout will
produce when run.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<LinearLayout
 xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 xmlns:tools="http://schemas.android.com/tools"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="match_parent"
 android:orientation="vertical"
 android:padding="16dp"
 tools:context=".MainActivity">
 <Button
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="0dp"
 android:layout_weight="1"
 android:layout_gravity="center_horizontal"
 android:text="Hello!" />
 <Button
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="0dp"
 android:layout_weight="1"
 android:gravity="center_horizontal"
 android:text="Goodbye!" />
</LinearLayout>
Your activity code tells Android which layout
it uses
So far in this chapter, you’ve learned how to use a linear layout and finetune the way in which its views are displayed. Before we introduce you to
another type of layout, let’s go behind the scenes and look at what happens
to the layout when the app runs.
As you already know, when Android runs an app, it launches the app’s main
activity. In the current app, this is an activity named MainActivity.
When the activity launches, its onCreate() method runs. This method
includes the following code that specifies which layout the activity should
use:
As you can see, the above code tells Android which layout to use by
passing the name of a layout to a method named setContentView().
The method then displays the layout on the screen.
The layout’s views are inflated into objects
As well as displaying the layout on the device screen, the
setContentView() method converts the views in the layout’s XML
into objects. This process is called layout inflation because it inflates each
view into an object:
Layout inflation is important because it’s what allows your activity code to
manipulate the views in your layout. Behind the scenes, each view is
rendered to an object, which you can interact with using activity code.
Let’s see how layout inflation works with the linear layout code we’ve built.
When you run your app, Android instantiates the layout XML by
converting each of the layout’s items into an object. This is known as
layout inflation.
Layout inflation: an example
As you already know, the linear layout code displays two editable text
views and a button inside a linear layout:
When the app runs, the views in the layout get inflated into objects. The
linear layout is inflated to a LinearLayout object, the editable text
views are inflated to EditText objects, and the button is inflated to a
Button:
Now that you know how layout inflation works, let’s find out how to use a
new type of layout: a frame layout.
A frame layout stacks its views
As you already know, a linear layout arranges its views in a single row or
column. Each view is allocated its own space on the screen, and they don’t
overlap one another.
Sometimes, however, you want your views to overlap. As an example,
suppose you want to display an image with some text overlaid on top of it.
You wouldn’t be able to achieve this just using a linear layout.
If you want a layout whose views can overlap, a simple option is to use a
frame layout. Instead of displaying its views in a single row or column, it
stacks them, one on top of another. It’s often used to hold just a single view.
We’ll examine how frame layouts work by creating a useful app which
displays some text on top of a duck image. We’ll start by creating a new
project.
Create a new project
Create a new Android Studio project using the same steps you used earlier.
Choose the Empty Activity option, enter a name of “Frame Layout
Example” and a package name of “com.hfad.framelayoutexample”, and
accept the default save location. Make sure the language is set to Kotlin,
and that the minimum SDK is API 21 so that it will run on most Android
devices.
Now that we’ve created the project, let’s define a frame layout.
How to define a frame layout
You define a frame layout using the <FrameLayout> element like this:
Just like a linear layout and any other type of view or view group, the
android:layout_width and android:layout_height attributes
specify the layout’s width and height, and are mandatory. You can
optionally add padding attributes too, although we’ve not done so here.
The above code creates an empty frame layout, so let’s go ahead and add a
duck image to it.
Add an image to your project
We’re going to display an image called duck.webp in the frame layout, but
first, we need to add the file to the project.
To do this, you need to create a drawable resource folder (if Android Studio
hasn’t already created one for you). This is the default folder for storing
image resources in your app. Switch to the Project view of Android Studio’s
explorer, select the app/src/main/res folder, go to the File menu, choose the
New… option, then click on the option to create a new Android resource
directory. When prompted, choose a resource type of “drawable”, name the
folder “drawable”, and click on OK.
Next, download the file duck.webp from tinyurl.com/hfad3, then add it to
the app/src/main/res/drawable folder.
We’re going to display duck.webp in an image view (a view that displays an
image) that we’ll add to the frame layout. An image view is defined using
the <ImageView> element like this:
SERIOUS CODING
Android’s preferred image format is WebP, which combines a small
file size with a minimum loss of quality.
You can convert images to WebP in Android Studio by right-clicking on
the image, and choosing the “Convert to WebP” option.
The <ImageView> element includes the android:layout_width
and android:layout_height attributes, which you’re already
familiar with, along with three new ones.
The android:src attribute specifies what image should be displayed in
the image view. We’ve set this to "@drawable/duck" so that it uses
duck.webp in the drawable folder.
The android:contentDescription attribute provides a text
description of the image for accessibility.
Finally, the android:scaleType attribute describes how you want to
scale the image. We’ve used "centerCrop", which crops the edges of
the image.
That’s everything that you need to know in order to display the duck image
in a frame layout. Before we find out how to display some text on top of it,
let’s take a closer look at how you use image—or drawable—resources.
DRAWABLE RESOURCES UP CLOSE
As you’ve just learned, you can add an image to your project by putting
it in your app’s app/src/main/res/drawable folder. Doing this includes
the image in your project as a drawable resource, which you can display
in your layout using code like this:
<ImageView
 android:id="@+id/image"
 android:layout_width="200dp"
 android:layout_height="100dp"
 android:src="@drawable/duck"
 android:contentDescription="Duck image" />
If you want, you can use different versions of the image depending on
the screen density of the device. This allows you to display higherresolution images on higher-density screens, and lower-resolution
images on lower-density screens.
To do this, you first create different drawable folders in
app/src/main/res for the different screen densities. Each folder has a
suffix that relates to a specific screen density:
You then add the different resolution images to each of the drawable
folders, making sure that each of the image files has the same name.
Android decides which version of the image to use at runtime,
depending on the screen density of the device it’s running on. If the
device has an extra-high-density screen, for example, it will use the
image located in the drawable-xhdpi folder.
If an image is added to just one of the folders, Android will use the
same image file for all devices. If you want your app to use the same
image regardless of screen density, you’d normally put it in the
drawable folder.
A frame layout stacks views in the order they
appear in the layout XML
When you define a frame layout, you list views in the order you want them
to be stacked. The first view is displayed first, the second is stacked on top
of it, and so on.
Here, we’re going to display a text view on top of the image view, so we’ll
add it below the image view in the XML. Update the activity_main.xml
code so that it matches the code shown here:
Test Drive
When we run the app, an image of a duck appears on the device with the
text “It’s a duck!” in the top corner.
All layouts are a type of ViewGroup…
Even though they display their views in different ways, you may have
noticed that linear layouts and frame layouts have a lot in common with one
another. They can each hold views, for example, and they also have their
own policy that determines how views are displayed.
There’s a good reason for this commonality. Behind the scenes, all layouts
—including linear layouts and frame layouts—are subclasses of the
android.view.ViewGroup superclass:
…and a ViewGroup is a type of View
The ViewGroup class is a subclass of View that can hold other views.
Behind the scenes, every layout is a subclass of ViewGroup, which means
that every layout is also a type of View.
This class hierarchy means that all views and layouts share common
attributes and behavior. They can all be displayed on the screen, for
instance, and you get to say how tall or wide they should be. It’s why you
need to specify values for each view and layout’s
android:layout_height and android:layout_width
attributes. These attributes are mandatory for all views, and as a layout is a
type of view, they are also mandatory for all layouts.
Every UI component you add to a layout is a type of View: an object
that takes up space on the screen.
Every layout is a type of ViewGroup: a type of View that can contain
other Views.
She’s right.
As you already know, a layout is a type of view that can hold other views.
As every layout is also a type of view, this means that layouts can hold
other layouts.
Being able to nest layouts inside other layouts is useful because it lets you
design more complex user interfaces. You can, for example, add horizontal
rows to a vertical linear layout by nesting horizontal linear layouts inside
the root linear layout. And if you want to arrange text vertically on top of an
image, you can do so by nesting a vertical linear layout inside a frame
layout.
Let’s take a closer look at how this works using a new type of layout: a
scroll view.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: You said earlier that I can display an image in my layout using
an image view. What if I want to add an image to a button? Can I
do that?
A: Yes. Buttons can include attributes such as
android:drawableStart and android:drawableEnd, which
allow you to position an image at the start or end of the button. The
following code, for example, adds a duck image at the start of a button:
android:drawableStart="@drawable/duck"
Android also includes an image button view: a button with an image but
no text. We’re not covering image buttons in this book, but if it’s
something you think you might want to do, you can find out more here:
https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/controls/button
A scroll view inserts a vertical scrollbar
A scroll view is a type of frame layout that has a vertical scrollbar. It’s
useful for layouts that are too big for the device they’re running on, as it
means that you can use it to scroll to any views that don’t fit on the screen.
We’re going to create an app that uses a scroll view. Create a new project
named “Scroll View Example”, choosing the Empty Activity option. Make
sure that the language is set to Kotlin, and that the minimum SDK is API 21
so that it will run on most Android devices. Then replace the code in
activity_main.xml with the code below:
As you can see, the above layout consists of a simple linear layout that
contains a Message edit text and a Send button.
Try running the app, and type lots of text into the edit text. The view
expands to fit the content, and it eventually pushes the Send button off the
edge of the screen. As there’s no scrollbar, you can no longer access the
button.
To fix this problem, we’ll add a scroll view to the layout. This will give us a
scrollbar we can use to access the Send button if it’s not visible on the
screen.
How to add a scroll view
You add a scroll view to your layout using the <ScrollView> element.
The <ScrollView> element is used in the same way as
<FrameLayout> except that it includes an extra attribute,
fillViewport, which is used to specify whether the scroll view should
fill the device screen.
NOTE
ScrollView is a subclass of FrameLayout, which means it can do everything a
FrameLayout can, and more.
In the code below, we’ve added a scroll view to the layout code so that it
encloses the original linear layout. Update the activity_main.xml code to
include the changes shown here (in bold):
We’ll take the code for a test drive after you’ve had a go at the following
exercise.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL
As you’ve learned, you can nest layouts inside one another to produce
more complex layouts. Use this knowledge to say or draw how you
might produce the layout shown below.
We’re not expecting you to write all the code for the layout, just say
how you might construct it.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL SOLUTION
As you’ve learned, you can nest layouts inside one another to produce
more complex layouts. Use this knowledge to say or draw how you
might produce the layout shown below.
We’re not expecting you to write all the code for the layout, just say
how you might construct it.
Test Drive
Once you’ve added a scroll view to your layout code, go ahead and run the
app.
When you enter lots of text into the Message edit text, the Send button gets
pushed off the edge of the screen as before. This time, however, we can
scroll the device screen to reach the button.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to use different types of layout to
control the appearance of your app’s UI. You’ll build on this knowledge in
the next chapter.
All layouts (including linear layouts, frame layouts, and scroll views)
can hold other layouts.
You can build complex layouts by nesting one type of layout inside
another.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Does a scroll view just add a vertical scrollbar? What if I want
to include a horizontal scrollbar?
A: Yes, <ScrollView> only adds a vertical scrollbar, not a
horizontal one.
If you want to add a horizontal scrollbar to your layout, you can do so
using the <HorizontalScrollView> element instead. A
horizontal scroll view works in the same way as a scroll view, except
that it adds a horizontal scrollbar instead of a vertical one.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 3 under your belt and now you’ve added building
layouts to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
<EditText> defines an editable text view.
Use <ImageView> to display an image.
A linear layout lists views either horizontally or vertically. You
specify the direction using the android:orientation
attribute.
In a linear layout, use android:layout_weight if you
want a view to use up extra space in the layout.
Use android:padding attributes to specify how much
padding you want between a view’s edges and its contents.
android:layout_gravity lets you say where you want
views to appear in their available space.
android:gravity lets you say where you want the
contents to appear inside a view.
Use android:layout_margin to add extra space around
a view.
A frame layout stacks views, one on top of another.
Add scrollbars using a scroll view or a horizontal scroll view.
These are both types of frame layout.
All layouts are subclasses of the
android.view.ViewGroup class. A view group is a type
of view that can contain multiple views.
Layouts can include other layouts.
Chapter 4. Constraint Layouts:
Draw Up a Blueprint
You don’t build a house without a blueprint.
And some layouts use blueprints to make sure they look exactly the way
you want. In this chapter, we’ll introduce you to Android’s constraint
layout: a flexible way of designing more complex UIs. You’ll discover
how constraints and bias let you position and size your views, irrespective
of screen size and orientation. You’ll find out how to keep views in their
place with guidelines and barriers. Finally, you’ll learn how to pack or
spread views with chains and flows. Let’s get designing…
Nested layouts revisited
In the previous chapter, you learned that you can nest layouts to build more
complex screens. The following code, for example, uses nested linear
layouts to display a text view and edit text in a horizontal row, with an edit
text below them:
Nesting layouts comes at a price
The down side to nested layouts is that building complex layouts in this
way can be inefficient, make your code harder to read and maintain, and
can also slow down your app.
When Android displays a layout on the device screen, it first checks the
structure of the layout file, and uses this to build a hierarchy of views. For
the nested layout shown on the previous page, for example, it builds a
hierarchy of views that contains two linear layouts, two edit texts, and a text
view:
Android uses the view hierarchy to help it figure out where each view
should be placed on the device screen. Each view needs to be measured,
laid out, and drawn on the screen, and Android needs to make sure each
view has enough space for its contents, and that any weights are taken into
account.
If the layout contains nested layouts, the view hierarchy is more complex,
and Android may need to make multiple passes in order to figure out how
views need to be arranged. If the layouts are deeply nested, this can lead to
bottlenecks in your code, and can leave you with a mass of code that’s
difficult to read and maintain.
If you have a more complex UI like this, an alternative to using nested
layouts is to use a constraint layout.
Each view in the layout needs to be initialized, measured, laid out, and
drawn. In deeply nested layouts, this can slow down your app.
Introducing the constraint layout
A constraint layout is more complex than a linear or frame layout, but it’s
way more flexible. It’s also much more efficient for complex UIs as it gives
you a flatter view hierarchy, which means that Android has less processing
to do at runtime.
You design constraint layouts VISUALLY
Another advantage of using constraint layouts is that they’re specifically
designed to work with Android Studio’s design editor. Unlike linear and
frame layouts where you usually hack directly in XML, you build constraint
layouts visually. You drag and drop views into the design editor’s blueprint,
and give it instructions for how each view should be displayed:
Use a constraint layout to build flexible UIs without nesting layouts.
Unlike linear and frame layouts, constraint layouts are part of a suite of
libraries known as Android Jetpack. You may have already heard
something about Jetpack, but what is it?
Constraint layouts are part of Android
Jetpack
Android Jetpack is a collection of libraries that help you follow best
practice, reduce boilerplate code, and make your coding life easier. It
includes constraint layouts, navigation, the Room persistence library (which
helps you build databases) and lots, lots more.
Here are some of our favorite Jetpack components; you’ll find out how to
use them in later chapters:
Another great thing about Jetpack is that it lets you write code that works
consistently across new and old versions of Android. This is great news for
your users, as it means that you can include exciting new Android features
that will work on older devices.
An example of this is AppCompatActivity, which you’ve already been
using to write activity code. We didn’t mention it earlier, but
AppCompatActivity is part of Android Jetpack. It adds new features to
activities across new and old versions of Android without you having to
worry about backward compatibility.
NOTE
Yes! You’ve already been using part of Android Jetpack without knowing it. You’ll
learn more about using Jetpack through the rest of this book.
In this chapter, you’re going to learn how to use constraint layouts. Let’s
run through what we’re going to do.
Here’s what we’re going to do
We’re going to break learning about constraint layouts into two main parts:
1. How to position and size a single view.
You’ll learn how to use constraints and bias to control how and
where a single view is shown in its layout.
2. How to position and size multiple views.
You’ll then apply your knowledge to multiple views, and learn
more advanced techniques using guidelines, barriers, chains, and
flows.
Create a new project
We’re going to use a new project for the app we’re going to build, so create
one now using the same steps you used in the previous chapters. Choose the
Empty Activity option, enter a name of “My Constraint Layout” and a
package name of “com.hfad.myconstraintlayout”, and accept the default
save location. Make sure the language is set to Kotlin and the minimum
SDK is API 21 so it will run on most Android devices.
Now that we’ve created the project, let’s make sure that it has been set up to
use constraint layouts.
Use Gradle to include Jetpack libraries
To make sure that all the Jetpack libraries—including constraint layouts —
work across all versions of Android, they’re not included in the main
Android SDK. Instead, you have to add any libraries you need using
Gradle. This is a build tool that’s used to compile code, configure apps, and
fetch any extra libraries that your project requires.
Every time you create a new project, Android Studio creates two Gradle
files named build.gradle.
The first version of build.gradle lives in the project folder, and specifies the
basic settings of your app, such as what version of the Gradle plug-in to
use.
The second version of build.gradle lives in the project’s app folder. It’s
where the majority of the app’s properties are set, such as the API level.
Behind the scenes, every Android Studio project uses Gradle as its
build tool.
The project build.gradle needs a Google repository line
Every project needs to know where to find any extra Jetpack libraries it
needs, and this is done by adding a reference to the Google repository in the
project’s build.gradle file. Android Studio usually does this for you, but
you can make sure it’s there by opening the file
MyConstraintLayout/build.gradle, and looking for the following line (in
bold) in the repositories section under allprojects:
The app build.gradle includes the constraint layout’s
library
To use constraint layouts, a reference to its library needs to be included in
the app’s build.gradle file. Android Studio should have already added this
for you, but you can double-check by opening the file
MyConstraintLayout/app/build.gradle, and looking for the following line
(in bold) in the dependencies section:
If the file doesn’t include this line, add it now, and click on the Sync Now
option that appears in the code editor. This syncs any changes you’ve made
with the rest of your project, and adds the library.
Let’s add a constraint layout to
activity_main.xml
Now that your project is all set up to use constraint layouts, let’s start using
one.
You add a constraint layout to a layout file using an
<androidx.constraintlayout.widget.ConstraintLayout
> element. We’re going to use one in the layout file activity_main.xml, so
open this file in the app/src/main/res/layout folder, and make sure its code
looks like this:
Show the layout in the blueprint
We’re going to add views to the layout using the design editor’s blueprint.
Switch to the design editor by clicking on the Design option, click on the
Select Design Surface button in the editor’s toolbar, and select the Blueprint
option. This shows you a blueprint of the layout like this:
Add a button to the blueprint
We’re going to add a button to the layout. To do this, go to the design
editor’s palette, find the Button component (it’s usually in the Common
section), and drag it to the blueprint. You can place the button anywhere in
the blueprint, just so long as it appears in its main area like this:
Position views using constraints
With a constraint layout, you don’t specify where views should be
positioned by dropping them on the blueprint in a particular place. Instead,
you specify placement by defining constraints. A constraint is a
connection or attachment that tells the layout where the view should be
positioned. You can use a constraint to attach a view to the start edge of the
layout, for example, or underneath another view.
We’ll add a horizontal constraint to the button
To see how this works, let’s add a constraint to attach the button to the left
edge of the layout.
First, make sure the button’s selected by clicking it. When you select a
view, a bounding box is drawn around it, and handles are added to its
corners and sides. The handles in the corners let you resize the view, and the
handles on the sides let you add constraints:
To add a constraint, you click on one of the view’s constraint handles and
drag it to whatever you want to attach it to. In this case, we’re going to
attach the left edge of the button to the left edge of the layout, so click on
the left constraint handle and drag it to the left edge of the blueprint:
This adds the constraint, and pulls the button over to the left:
That’s how you add a horizontal constraint. Let’s see what happens when
you add a vertical one.
Add a vertical constraint too
We’ll use a vertical constraint to attach the button to the top of the layout.
To do this, click on the button’s top constraint handle, and drag it to the top
of the blueprint. This adds the vertical constraint, which pulls the button up.
EXERCISE
You’ve seen what happens when you add constraints to the button’s left
and top edges. What do you think happens when you add opposing
constraints to the button’s right and bottom edges as well? Try doing
this now, and draw your answers below.
EXERCISE SOLUTION
You’ve seen what happens when you add constraints to the button’s left
and top edges. What do you think happens when you add opposing
constraints to the button’s right and bottom edges as well? Try doing
this now, and draw your answers below.
Use opposing constraints to center views
As you’ve learned, you can use constraints to attach a view to the edge of
the blueprint. Each constraint works like a spring that pulls the view to the
blueprint’s edge.
If you want to position views in the center of the blueprint, you can do so
by adding constraints to opposite sides of the view. To center a button
horizontally, for example, you add one constraint that pulls the view to the
left, and another that pulls it to the right like this:
The two constraints pull the button in opposite directions, which centers it
horizontally like so:
You can also center a view vertically by adding constraints to its top and
bottom edges. And if you wanted to center it horizontally and vertically,
you’d add constraints to all four edges like this:
You can delete constraints you no longer
need
You can remove any constraints you no longer need by selecting them in the
blueprint, and deleting them. If you have a button that’s centered in the
middle of the blueprint, for example, you delete the constraint that’s
attached to its bottom edge:
WATCH IT!
Make sure each view has at least one vertical and horizontal
constraint.
If the view has no vertical constraints, it will be displayed at the top of
the layout when you run the app. If the view has no horizontal ones, it
will be displayed next to its start edge.
Deleting this constraint means that the button is no longer being pulled
toward the bottom of the blueprint. The top constraint pulls the button to the
top so that it’s only centered horizontally, and not vertically:
Another way of removing constraints you no longer need is to use the
constraint widget tool. Let’s see how this works.
Remove constraints with the constraint
widget
The constraint widget is displayed in the Attributes panel at the side of the
design editor. It appears when you select a view, and displays a diagram
featuring the view’s constraints, and the size of any margins.
NOTE
You’ll find out more about the Attributes panel a few pages ahead.
To delete a constraint in the constraint widget, select the view in the
blueprint you want to remove the constraint from, then click on the
constraint’s handle in the constraint widget. The constraint is removed, and
the view is repositioned in the blueprint.
You can use it to add margins too
You may have noticed that each of the constraints in the constraint widget
has a number next to it. This is used to set the margin size for that edge of
the view so that there’s space between the view and the layout’s edge. To
change the size of a view’s left and top margins to 24dp, for example, you’d
update their values in the diagram to 24:
You can set a default size for any new margins using the Default Margins
button in the design editor’s toolbar. Setting this to 24dp, for example,
means that any new constraints that get added will automatically include a
margin of 24dp.
Changes to the blueprint appear in the XML
When you add views to a blueprint, and specify constraints and margins,
they get added to the layout’s underlying XML. To see this, switch to the
layout’s code view. Your code should look something like this (but don’t
worry if it’s slightly different):
As you can see, the XML now includes a button. Does its code look
familiar to you? If so, nice catch—it includes attributes that you learned
about in Chapter 3.
The button’s width, height, and margins are specified in exactly the same
way as before, and if you want to, you can change their values in the XML
instead of using the design editor.
The only unfamiliar code is the two lines that specify the view’s constraints
on its start and top edges:
Similar code is generated if you add constraints to the button’s remaining
edges.
Now that you’ve had a glimpse of what constraint layout XML looks like
switch back to the design editor, and we’ll look at some more techniques
you can use to position views.
Views can have bias
As you learned earlier, you can add constraints to opposite sides of a view.
This centers the view by default, but you can also control its position
relative to each side by changing its bias. This tells Android what the
proportionate length of each constraint should be on either side of the view.
To see this in action, let’s change the button’s horizontal bias so that it’s
positioned off-center. First, make sure that the button includes constraints
on its left and right sides like this:
Then select the button so the constraint widget is displayed.
Underneath the widget’s diagram of the view, you should see a slider with a
number in it. This is a percentage of the view’s horizontal bias.
To change the bias, simply move the slider. If, say, you move the slider to
the left so that the number changes to 30, it moves the button in the
blueprint to the left as well:
The view maintains this relative position irrespective of screen size and
orientation. Let’s try this out by taking the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, a button appears off-center toward the top of the
screen. It maintains the same relative position when we rotate the device.
You’ve now learned various techniques to control a view’s position on the
screen. Next up, how to change its size.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: You said that all the Jetpack components (including constraint
layouts) have separate libraries that aren’t part of the main
Android release. Why is this?
A: It’s so you can use new versions and features of these components in
older versions of Android.
Q: When you added the constraint layout library to the app’s
build.gradle file, you said that you were using a particular version.
Can I use a different one?
A: All of the features and code we’ve used in this chapter work with
that version of the constraints layout library. Libraries are always
getting fresh updates, but bear in mind that using a different version
might break some of the code.
Q: How will I know if there’s a new version?
A: The build.gradle files usually spot when a new version is available,
and let you know.
Q: Is there a way of making the design editor add constraints for
me automatically?
A: There’s an “Enable Autoconnection to Parent” button in the design
editor toolbar, which you can use to automatically add constraints
between each new view and the edge of the blueprint.
There’s also an Infer Constraints button, which guesses what constraints
are needed based on the position of views in the layout.
We’ve had mixed results with these options, but feel free to try them
out.
You can change a view’s size
As you might expect, you can change a view’s size in a constraint layout by
updating its layout_width and layout_height attributes. You can
do this in the layout’s XML, or in the design editor’s Attributes panel.
The Attributes panel is displayed to the side of the blueprint. When you
select a view, it shows you all the attributes that have already been declared
(such as layout_width and layout_height), and lets you set ones
that haven’t.
Make the view just big enough
Just like with linear and frame layouts, you make a view just large enough
to display its contents by setting its layout_width and
layout_height properties to wrap_content. If the view is a button,
for example, it makes the button just large enough to hold its text:
Match the view’s constraints
If you’ve added constraints to opposite sides of your view, you can make
the view match the size of its constraints. You do this by setting its
layout_width and/or layout_height to 0dp: set layout_width
to 0dp to make the view match its horizontal constraints, and set
layout_height to 0dp to make it match its vertical ones.
In the example below, we’ve set the button’s layout_width to 0dp so
that the button matches its horizontal constraints:
Now that you’ve seen how to resize a view, try experimenting with the
different techniques, then have a go at the exercise on the next page.
BE the Constraint
Your job is to play like you’re the constraint layout and draw the
constraints that are needed to produce each layout. You also need to
specify the layout_width, layout_height, and bias (when needed) for
each view. We’ve completed the first one for you.
BE the Constraint Solution
Your job is to play like you’re the constraint layout and draw the
constraints that are needed to produce each layout. You also need to
specify the layout_width, layout_height, and bias (when needed) for
each view. We’ve completed the first one for you.
Most layouts need multiple views
So far you’ve seen how to position and size a single view in a constraint
layout. Most of the time, however, your layout will need to contain multiple
views that are laid out relative to one another.
To see how this works, first make sure that your constraint layout includes a
single button with two constraints: one that connects its top edge to the top
of the blueprint, and another that connects its left edge to the blueprint’s left
side. Its layout_width and layout_height properties should be set
to wrap_content, and the margins for these edges should be set to 24dp.
After you’ve made these changes, the button should be positioned in the
blueprint’s top-left corner like this:
Add a second button to the blueprint
Next, add a second button to the blueprint by dragging one from the palette,
and placing it somewhere underneath the first button like this:
The blueprint now includes two buttons. Let’s find out how to position them
relative to one another.
You can connect views to other views
As you already know, constraints let you attach a view to the edge of its
blueprint. You can also use constraints to connect two views together, and
this is used to specify how they should be displayed relative to one another.
To see how this works, select the second button in the blueprint, then draw a
constraint that goes from the second button’s top edge to the first button’s
bottom edge like this:
When the constraint is added, it pulls the button up so that it’s connected to
the first, and displayed underneath it:
The constraint means that the second button will always be positioned
under the first, irrespective of the first button’s position on the device
screen.
Once you’ve positioned two views in this way, the next thing you might
want to do is make sure that they’re aligned. Let’s find out how to do this.
You can align views too
The simplest way of aligning two views is to use the Align button in the
design editor’s toolbar.
To see how this works, let’s left-align the two buttons in the blueprint so
that their left edges line up. First, select both buttons by holding down the
Shift key as you click on each one. Then click on the Align button to open
up a set of alignment options like this:
Click on the Left Edges option to left-align the two buttons. This adds a
constraint to the blueprint that connects their left edges together like this:
Align views using guidelines
Another technique you can use to align views is a guideline. This is a fixed
line you add to the blueprint that you can use to constrain views. It’s only
visible in the design editor, so users don’t see it when they run the app.
Let’s explore how guidelines work by adding one to the blueprint. Click on
the Guidelines button in the design editor’s toolbar, and choose the option
to add a vertical guideline. This places a vertical guideline in the blueprint:
Once the guideline has been added, you can move it elsewhere by dragging
it. You can set it to be either a fixed distance from the blueprint’s edge, or a
fixed percentage:
You can then use constraints to attach views to the guideline like this:
Guidelines have a fixed position
Guidelines are either positioned a fixed distance from the blueprint’s edge,
or a fixed percentage between the two. They stay in that position when the
app runs, so they’re a useful way of aligning views.
In some situations, you need something that’s a little more flexible. As an
example, suppose you have a layout that includes two multi-line edit texts,
side by side, with a button underneath like this:
The edit texts expand vertically as the user enters text. You want the button
to move as the views change size so that it’s always positioned beneath
them like so:
So how can you build this sort of layout?
Create a movable barrier
To create layouts like this, you can use a barrier. This is like a guideline,
except that it doesn’t have a fixed position. Instead, it forms a barrier
against views, and moves when they change size. This repositions any
views that are constrained to the barrier.
In the example on the previous page, the two edit texts are placed above a
horizontal barrier, and the button is constrained beneath it. As the edit texts
expand, the barrier moves down and repositions the button:
Let’s build a layout that uses a barrier
To see how barriers work, let’s create this example.
First, delete any views, and make sure the blueprint includes a vertical
guideline positioned at 50%. Then drag two multi-line edit texts from the
palette, and position them on either side of the guideline.
NOTE
You can usually find these in the “Text” part of the palette, listed as “Multiline Text.”
Next, add vertical constraints to constrain each view to the top of the
blueprint, and horizontal constraints to position each one between the
blueprint’s edge and the guideline.
Finally, change the layout_width of each edit text to 0dp so that it
matches its horizontal constraints, and set their layout_heights to
“wrap_content” so that the views can expand.
When you’re done, the blueprint should look something like this:
Add a horizontal barrier
We need to add a horizontal barrier to the blueprint. To do this, click on the
Guidelines button in the design editor toolbar, and choose the option to add
a horizontal barrier:
This creates the horizontal barrier.
Place the barrier beneath the views
We want the barrier to move down as the two edit text views expand. To do
this, go to the layout’s component tree panel, and drag the two edit text
components onto the barrier:
This doesn’t change the position of the edit text views in the blueprint: it
simply tells the barrier that it needs to move with these views.
Next, we need to position the barrier so that it’s at the bottom of the two
views. Select the barrier in the component tree, and use the Attributes panel
to change its barrierDirection attribute to “bottom.” This positions
the barrier below the two edit texts so that the blueprint looks like this:
Constrain a button under the barrier
Now that the layout’s barrier is in place, let’s add the button, and constrain
it to the barrier so that it moves down as the edit text views expand.
First drag a button from the palette to the blueprint, and place it somewhere
underneath the barrier. Then center it horizontally by adding two horizontal
constraints that connect the button’s sides to the edges of the blueprint like
this:
Next, you need to attach the top of the button to the barrier. You can try
doing this by drawing the constraint directly in the blueprint. If, like us, you
find this a bit too fiddly, select the button, search for its
layout_constraintTop_toBottomOf attribute in the Attributes
panel, and change its value to the barrier’s ID (in our case, this is
@id/barrier).
After you make this change, the blueprint should look something like this:
As barriers can be quite tricky to work with at first, we’ll show you our
complete XML over the next couple pages, and then take the app for a test
drive.
The full code for activity_main.xml
Here’s our complete code for activity_main.xml; if you want your blueprint
to look like ours, replace the contents of this file so that it matches the code
shown here:
Test Drive
When we run the app, a button is displayed beneath two edit text views.
The button moves down when we type into each edit text, and the views
expand.
As you can see, adding a barrier is a bit more complicated than drawing
constraints and aligning views, but we think it’s worth the extra effort.
So what’s next?
Use a chain to control a linear group of
views
You’ve now learned how to connect and align views, and use guidelines and
constraints. But what if you want to create a row or column of views, and
evenly space them out?
In this sort of situation, you can use a chain. This is a linear group of views
that are linked together with bidirectional constraints. The chain controls
each view’s position, so you can use it to evenly space the views out, or
pack them in the center of the blueprint.
We’re going to create a horizontal chain
To see how this works, we’re going to create a chain that controls the
position of three buttons. The buttons will be lined up in a horizontal row,
and evenly spaced between each side of the blueprint like this:
When the app runs, the buttons will maintain their relative positions,
regardless of screen size or orientation:
Let’s find out how to create a chain.
The chain will use three buttons
Before we create the chain, first remove all of the constraints that have been
added to the blueprint so far. The quickest way of doing this is with the
Clear All Constraints button in the design editor’s toolbar, so click on this
button now.
You also need to get rid of any guidelines, barriers, and edit text views. Do
this by selecting each one, and deleting it.
Then add two more buttons to the blueprint so there are three in total, and
use the “Orientation for Preview” button in the design editor’s toolbar to
change the blueprint’s orientation to landscape. This will make it easier to
see the chain.
When you’ve added the buttons, the blueprint should look something like
this:
Align the views we’re going to chain
Chains work best when views are aligned. First, add a constraint that
connects the first button to the top of the blueprint, and set its margin to 64.
Then select all three buttons, and use the Align button in the design editor’s
toolbar to align their top edges. The blueprint should look like this.
Now that the buttons are nicely aligned, let’s go ahead and create the chain.
Create the horizontal chain
To create the chain, select all three buttons, then right-click on one of them.
From the menu that appears, choose the Chains option, followed by Create
Horizontal Chain.
When the horizontal chain is created, it joins the buttons together, and
fastens the first and last view to the blueprint’s vertical edges. The chain
should look something like this:
By default, views in a chain are evenly spaced out between the blueprint’s
edges. You can change this behavior by right-clicking on one of the chain’s
views, selecting the Chains option from the menu that appears, and then
choosing Horizontal Chain Style.
Possible chain style options include spread, spread inside, and packed. See
if you can work out what these options do by having a go at the following
exercise.
EXERCISE
Right-click on one of the buttons in the horizontal chain, select the
Chains option from the menu that appears, and then choose Horizontal
Chain Style. What happens to the views when you choose each option?
Draw the blueprint for each option below, and describe how it arranges
the views.
Spread:
Spread inside:
Packed:
EXERCISE SOLUTION
Right-click on one of the buttons in the horizontal chain, select the
Chains option from the menu that appears, and then choose Horizontal
Chain Style. What happens to the views when you choose each option?
Draw the blueprint for each option below, and describe how it arranges
the views.
Spread:
Spread inside:
Packed:
There are different styles of chain
As you have discovered, you can choose different chain styles to change
how a chain arranges its views.
Spread spaces out views between the blueprint’s edges
The default style is spread. This is used to evenly distribute the views
between the blueprint’s edges like this:
Spread inside moves the first and last view to the edges
The spread inside style is similar to spread, except that it moves the first
and last view to the blueprint’s edges. It then evenly spaces out any
remaining views like so:
Packed moves the views together
The packed style is used to pack views together. It then centers the entire
group of views like this:
Now that you’ve seen what these options do, let’s take the app for a test
drive.
Test Drive
When we use the spread style of chain and run the app, the buttons are
evenly spread in the device screen. This is irrespective of screen orientation.
Always test layouts on a variety of device sizes and orientations to make
sure they look and behave how you want.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Can I make views a fixed size?
A: Yes. It’s not generally recommended because it means they can’t
grow or shrink to fit the size of their contents, or the size of the screen.
If you definitely do need a fixed size view, you can either update its
attributes, or use its corner handles to resize it in the blueprint.
Q: Can I attach a chain to a guideline?
A: Yes, you can.
Q: What happens if I make a view invisible?
A: It depends how you do it.
If you set a view’s visibility attribute to invisible, the view
won’t appear on the screen, and there’ll be an empty space in its place.
If you set it to gone, the view takes up no space on the screen, and
things like chains will act as though it’s not there.
She’s right.
Constraint layouts can include both horizontal and vertical chains, and a
single view can belong to both types. You can use this to arrange views in a
grid.
The blueprint below, for example, shows six buttons arranged in a grid.
Each row is a horizontal chain, and the leftmost buttons form a vertical
chain:
Another way in which you can create grids is to use a flow. Let’s find out
what this is, and how to use it.
A flow is like a multi-line chain
A flow is like a chain that can span multiple rows. It’s invaluable when, say,
you want to display lots of views in a row, but they might not fit on the
screen for some screen sizes or orientations.
As an example, suppose you have a chain that displays six buttons in a
horizontal row. When the orientation is landscape, they are displayed like
this:
But when the orientation is changed to portrait, there’s not enough room to
display all of the views:
If you replace the chain with a flow, any views that can’t fit on the first row
will flow onto a second row like this:
Let’s see how flows work by building the above layout.
How to add a flow
First, remove any constraints by clicking on the Clear All Constraints
button in the design editor’s toolbar. Then add extra buttons to the blueprint
so there are six in total like this:
Next, select all of the buttons, click on the Guidelines button in the design
editor’s toolbar, and choose the Flow option. This adds the flow component.
We now need to tweak the flow component’s settings to make it behave the
way we want. To do this, select the flow in the component tree, then use the
blueprint or constraint widget to add constraints to connect its sides and top
to the edges of the blueprint. Change its layout_width attribute to
“0dp” so that it matches its constraints. Finally, search for its
flow_wrapMode attribute in the Attributes panel, and set this to “chain”.
When you’ve made all of these changes, the blueprint should look
something like this when the orientation is landscape:
If you change the orientation to portrait, the blueprint should look like this
instead:
Once you’ve created a flow, you can tweak the way in which it displays its
views. Let’s see how.
You can control the flow’s appearance
The main way in which you can alter the flow’s appearance is with its
flow_wrapMode attribute.
Use “chain” to create a multi-line chain
If you set the flow_wrapMode attribute to chain, the flow behaves like
a flexible chain that lets its views flow onto extra rows.
With this option, you can make further changes to the flow’s appearance by
changing the value of its flow_horizontalStyle attribute. Possible
options for this attribute are spread, spread inside, and packed. These have
exactly the same effect as when you used them with chains. The packed
option, for example, packs the views together like this:
Use “aligned” to line up the views
If you set the flow_wrapMode attribute to aligned, the views flow
onto extra rows, and they are lined up like this:
You can also set the flow_wrapMode attribute to none or leave it unset.
This makes the flow behave like a normal chain so that its views don’t flow
onto a second row.
The full code for activity_main.xml
Flows can sometimes be a little tricky to get right, so here’s our full code
for activity_main.xml; if you want to, replace the code for this file so it
matches the code shown here:
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we use the chain style of flow and run the app, the buttons are evenly
spread in the device screen when the orientation is landscape.
When we change the orientation to portrait, any buttons that don’t fit onto
the first row flow onto the second.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to design super-flexible screens
using constraint layouts. As well as looking and behaving the way you
want, they don’t use nested layouts, so they’re extremely efficient.
Before you move on to the next chapter, why not put your new skills
into practice, and try experimenting with some of the techniques you’ve
learned?
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 4 under your belt and now you’ve added constraint
layouts to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
Constraint layouts are designed to work with Android Studio’s
design editor.
Position views by adding constraints. Each view needs at least
one horizontal and one vertical constraint.
Center views by adding constraints to opposite sides of the
view. Change the view’s bias to update its position between the
constraints.
You can change a view’s size to match its constraints if the
view has constraints on opposing sides.
You can align views to one another, or use a guideline or
barrier.
A guideline is positioned a fixed distance or percentage from
the blueprint’s edge.
A barrier moves as and when its views change size.
Use a chain to control a linear group of views. Chains can be
horizontal or vertical.
Horizontal and vertical chains can work together to display
views in a grid.
The spread chain style spreads its views out evenly.
The spread inside chain style moves its outer views to the
edges, and the inner views are spread out evenly.
The packed chain style packs views together in the center.
A flow is like a multi-line chain.
Chapter 5. The Activity
Lifecycle: Being an Activity
Activities form the foundation of every Android app.
So far you’ve seen how to create an activity, and use it to interact with the
user. But if you don’t know about the activity lifecycle, some of its
behavior might take you by surprise. In this chapter, you’ll learn what
happens when an activity is created and destroyed, and how this can lead
to unexpected consequences. You’ll find out how to control its behavior
when it’s made visible, or hidden. You’ll even discover ways of saving
and restoring your activity’s state, just when you need it. Read on to find
out more…
How do activities really work?
So far you’ve seen how to create an interactive app by specifying how the
app should behave in its activity code. But there are still lots of things you
don’t yet know about how activities function.
How long does an activity live for? What happens when your activity
disappears from the screen? Is it still running? Is it still in memory? And
what happens if your app gets interrupted by an incoming phone call?
You want to be able to control the behavior of your activities in a whole
range of different circumstances, so we’re going to take a closer look at
how activities work under the hood. We’ll look at some common ways in
which your apps can break, and how you can fix them using the activity
lifecycle methods. We’ll explore these functions using a Stopwatch app as
an example.
Introducing the Stopwatch app
The Stopwatch app has four views: a view that displays the elapsed time, a
Start button that starts the stopwatch, a Pause button that pauses it, and a
Reset button that sets the timer value back to 0. Here’s what the app looks
like:
We’ll build the app over the next few pages, and we’ll start by creating a
new project.
Create a new project
Create a new Android Studio project using the same steps you used in
previous chapters. Choose the Empty Activity option, enter a name of
“Stopwatch” and a package name of “com.hfad.stopwatch”, and accept the
default save location. Make sure the language is set to Kotlin and the
minimum SDK is API 21 so it will run on most Android devices.
Add String resources for the text labels
The Stopwatch layout features three buttons labeled Start, Pause, and Reset.
We’ll add these labels to strings.xml as !String resources so the app can
look up their values at runtime.
To add the String resources, open the file strings.xml in the
app/src/main/res/values folder, and update it so it includes the changes
below:
Now that we’ve added the String resources, let’s build the layout.
The layout includes a Chronometer view
The layout is comprised of three buttons, and a view that displays the
number of seconds on the stopwatch. To display the number of seconds,
we’ll use a chronometer.
A chronometer is a type of text view that acts as a simple timer. It has builtin methods you can use to start and stop it, and it displays the elapsed time.
You add a chronometer to your layout using the <Chronometer>
element. The following code, for example, adds a Chronometer view
with an ID of “stopwatch” that is just large enough for its contents:
<Chronometer
 android:id="@+id/stopwatch"
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content" />
You’ll learn more about how the chronometer works when we write the
activity code. First, let’s look at the full code for the layout.
The full code for activity_main.xml
The full code for activity_main.xml features a Chronometer view and
three buttons. Update your code in activity_main.xml so that it matches the
code below:
The layout is now complete. Next, let’s move on to the activity.
The activity code controls the stopwatch
The activity code needs to specify how the Start, Pause, and Reset buttons
control the stopwatch. The Start button needs to start it running (if it’s not
running already), the Pause button needs to pause it, and the Reset button
needs to set it back to 0.
The buttons will control the stopwatch by accessing the Chronometer
view’s built-in properties and methods. Let’s take a look at these.
The Chronometer’s key properties and methods
As we said earlier, the Chronometer view is a type of TextView. It
inherits all of TextView’s properties and methods, and defines some new
ones too.
Here are all the Chronometer properties and methods we’ll be using in
the MainActivity code:
The base property
The Chronometer base property is used to set the start time: the time
from which the chronometer will start counting.
You set the start time to the current time by setting the base property to
SystemClock.elapsedRealtime() using code like this:
SystemClock.elapsedRealtime() returns the number of
milliseconds since the device was booted. Setting the base property to this
value means that the time that’s displayed is set to 0.
The start() method
The start() method makes the chronometer start counting from the base
time:
The stop() method
This pauses the chronometer so it stops counting:
Now that you know about the Chronometer view’s properties and
methods we’ll be using, let’s look at the activity code.
SERIOUS CODING
You can find out more about using the Chronometer view in the online
documentation here:
https://developer.android.com/reference/android/widget/Chronometer
The full code for MainActivity.kt
The code for MainActivity requires an OnClickListener for each
button. The one for the Start button needs to start the stopwatch if it’s not
already running, the one for the Pause button needs to pause it, and the
Reset button’s OnClickListener needs to set the display back to 0.
We’re using three properties to help us with this: stopwatch, running,
and offset.
The stopwatch property holds a reference to the Chronometer view.
The running property records whether the stopwatch is running. We’ll set
it to true when the Start button’s clicked, and false when the user clicks
the Pause button.
The offset property is used to display the correct time on the stopwatch
if the stopwatch has been paused and restarted. Without this, the stopwatch
will display the incorrect time.
We’ve also included two methods (setBaseTime and saveOffset) to
help make the code more readable.
Here’s the full code for MainActivity.kt; update your code to include all of
the changes:
Let’s run through how we expect the code to work.
What happens when you run the app
1. The user runs the app, and MainActivity starts.
The running and offset properties are initialized. running
is set to false, and offset is set to 0.
2. MainActivity’s onCreate method gets called.
The activity_main.xml layout is linked to the activity, and the
stopwatch property is given a reference to the Chronometer
view.
3. The user clicks the Start button.
The stopwatch.base property is set to
SystemClock.elapsedRealTime(), its start() method
is called, and running is set to true. The stopwatch starts
running.
4. The user clicks the Pause button.
MainActivity updates the offset property and calls the
stopwatch stop() method and running is set to false. The
stopwatch pauses.
5. The user clicks the Reset button.
The offset property is set to 0, and the stopwatch.base
property is reset to SystemClock.elapsedRealTime().
6. The user clicks the Start button again.
MainActivity uses the offset value to adjust the
stopwatch.base property, calls its start() method, and sets
running to true. The stopwatch starts running again.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, it seems to work as we expect it to. We can start,
pause, and reset the stopwatch without any problems.
But there’s just one problem…
When we turn the device so the screen rotates, the app goes wrong. The
stopwatch sets itself back to 0 and stops running.
So why does the app break when we rotate the screen? Let’s go behind the
scenes to find out more.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the code runs:
1. Click on the Start button to start the stopwatch.
The stopwatch starts, and the running property is set to true.
2. Rotate the device screen.
Android sees that the screen orientation has changed, and it
destroys MainActivity. Its property values are lost.
3. MainActivity restarts.
The activity is recreated, all its properties are reinitialized, and
onCreate() runs again. The stopwatch doesn’t restart as
onCreate() doesn’t tell it to.
Rotating the screen changes the device
configuration
When Android runs your app and starts an activity, it takes into account the
device configuration. By this we mean the configuration of the physical
device (such as the screen size, screen orientation, and whether there’s a
keyboard attached) and also configuration options specified by the user
(such as the locale).
Android needs to know what the device configuration is when it starts an
activity because the configuration can impact what resources are needed for
the application. You may need to use a different layout if the device screen
is in landscape mode rather than portrait, for instance, and a different set of
String values if the locale is France.
The device configuration includes options specified by the user (such
as the locale), and options relating to the physical device (such as the
orientation and screen size). A change to any of these options results in
the activity being destroyed and then recreated.
When the device configuration changes, anything that displays a user
interface needs to be updated to match the new configuration. If you rotate
the screen, for example, Android spots the orientation has changed, and
classes this as a change to the device configuration. It destroys the current
activity, and then recreates it so that resources appropriate to the new
configuration get picked up.
An activity’s states
When Android creates and destroys an activity, the activity moves from
being launched to running to being destroyed.
The main state of an activity is when it’s running or active. An activity is
running when it’s in the foreground of the screen, it has the focus, and the
user can interact with it. The activity spends most of its life in this state. An
activity starts running after it has been launched, and at the end of its life,
the activity is destroyed.
When an activity moves from being launched to being destroyed, it triggers
key activity lifecycle methods: the onCreate() and onDestroy()
methods. These are lifecycle methods that the activity inherits, and that you
can override.
The onCreate() method gets called immediately after your activity is
launched. This method is where you do all your normal activity setup such
as calling setContentView(). You should always override this method.
If you don’t override it, you won’t be able to tell Android what layout your
activity should use.
The onDestroy() method is the final call you get before the activity is
destroyed. There are a number of situations in which an activity can get
destroyed—for example, if it’s been told to finish, if the activity is being
recreated due to a change in device configuration, or if Android has decided
to destroy the activity in order to save space.
We’ll take a closer look at how these methods fit into the activity states on
the next page.
An activity is running when it’s in the foreground of the screen.
onCreate() gets called when the activity is first created, and it’s where
you do your normal activity setup.
onDestroy() gets called just before your activity gets destroyed.
The activity lifecycle: from create to destroy
Here’s an overview of the activity lifecycle from birth to death. As you’ll
see later in the chapter, we’ve left out some of the details because at this
point we’re just focusing on the onCreate() and onDestroy()
methods.
1. The activity gets launched.
The activity object is created and its constructor is run.
2. The onCreate() method runs immediately after the activity is
launched.
The onCreate() method is where any initialization code should
go, as this method always gets called after the activity has
launched but before it starts running.
3. An activity is running when it’s visible in the foreground and
the user can interact with it.
This is where an activity spends most of its life.
4. The onDestroy() method runs immediately before the activity is
destroyed.
The onDestroy() method enables you to perform any final
cleanup such as freeing up resources.
5. After the onDestroy() method has run, the activity is destroyed.
The activity ceases to exist.
NOTE
If your device is extremely low on memory, onDestroy() might not get called before the
activity is destroyed.
The onCreate() and onDestroy() methods are two of the activity
lifecycle methods. So where do these methods come from?
Your activity inherits the lifecycle methods
The activity lifecycle methods are defined in the
android.app.Activity class. Each activity you create is a subtype of
this class, so it inherits these methods.
Here’s a diagram showing the main classes in your activity’s class
hierarchy:
Now that you know more about how your activity gets its lifecycle
methods, let’s see how you deal with device configuration changes.
Save the current state in a Bundle
As you saw earlier, the Stopwatch app went wrong when we rotated the
device. MainActivity was destroyed and recreated, so all the property
values were lost, and the Chronometer view was reset.
To fix this bug, we’ll save the state of the Chronometer and property
values before the activity gets destroyed, and restore them when the activity
gets recreated. We’ll save the values in a type of object called a Bundle.
A Bundle is a type of object that’s used to hold key/value pairs. Before the
activity is destroyed, Android lets you put key/value pairs into a Bundle.
This Bundle is then picked up by the new instance of the activity when
it’s recreated. Using a Bundle therefore gives you a way of reinstating an
activity’s state when you rotate the device screen.
Before we show you how the Bundle is passed between activity instances,
let’s look at how you add and retrieve values.
Add values using put methods
You add key/value pairs to a Bundle using put methods. The putLong
method puts a Long value into a Bundle, putBoolean() adds a
Boolean, and so on. The following code, for example, puts a key of
“answer” and an Int value of 42 into a Bundle named bundle:
bundle.putInt("answer", 42)
You can save multiple key/value pairs to a Bundle. Each key must be of
type String?, and the value must match the method call. You can’t, say,
put an Int value into a Bundle using the putString() method
without upsetting the compiler.
Retrieve values using get methods
Once you’ve put a key/value pair into a Bundle, you can retrieve the value
using the Bundle’s get methods. The getLong() method lets you get a
Long value, for example, and you use the getBoolean() method to
retrieve a Boolean.
Each get method takes one parameter: the name of the key whose value
you want to get. The following code, for example, gets the value that’s
saved against a key of “answer” in a Bundle named bundle:
val answerOfLife = bundle.getInt("answer")
Now that you know how to add and retrieve values using a Bundle, let’s
find out how to use one to save and restore an activity’s state.
Save the state using onSaveInstanceState()
Bundles are passed from one instance of an activity to another using two
methods: onSaveInstanceState() and onCreate().
onSaveInstanceState() lets you add values to a Bundle before the
activity is destroyed, and onCreate() picks the Bundle up again when
the activity has been recreated.
Each activity inherits the onSaveInstanceState() method from its
Activity superclass. It gets called just before the activity is destroyed,
and takes one parameter: a Bundle.
You override the onSaveInstanceState() method in your activity
using code like this:
override fun onSaveInstanceState(savedInstanceState: Bundle) {
 savedInstanceState.putInt("answer", 42)
 super.onSaveInstanceState(savedInstanceState)
}
The above example puts a key of “answer” and an Int value of 42 into the
onSaveInstanceState() method’s Bundle (named
savedInstanceState). It then calls the superclass version of
onSaveInstanceState(), which saves the state of the view hierarchy.
Restore the state using onCreate()
As you already know, the onCreate() method gets called when the
activity is recreated, and it takes one parameter, a Bundle?. If the
activity’s being created from scratch, the Bundle? will be null, but if the
activity’s being recreated, it’s the same Bundle object that was used by
onSaveInstanceState().
You use the onCreate() method to get values from the Bundle using
code like this:
So what code changes do we need to make to the Stopwatch app?
The updated MainActivity.kt code
We’ve updated the MainActivity code so that if the user rotates the
device, its state gets saved in a Bundle using the
onSaveInstanceState() method, and restored via onCreate().
Update your MainActivity.kt code to include these changes (below in bold):
Let’s run through what the code does, and take the app for a test drive.
What happens when you run the app
1. The user starts the app, and clicks on the Start button.
The stopwatch starts and the running property is set to true.
2. The user rotates the device screen.
Android views this as a configuration change, and gets ready to
destroy the activity. Before the activity is destroyed,
onSaveInstanceState() gets called. The
onSaveInstanceState() method saves the offset,
running and stopwatch.base values to a Bundle.
3. Android destroys the activity, and then recreates it.
The activity’s property values get reset.
4. The onCreate() method gets called.
It uses the values saved in the Bundle to set the property values.
5. The stopwatch starts running again and displays the correct
time.
Test Drive
Make the changes to your activity code, then run the app.
When we click on the Start button, the timer starts, and it continues when
we rotate the device screen.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Remind me, why does Android recreate the activity just because
I rotate the screen?
A: The onCreate() method is normally used to set up the screen. If
your code in onCreate() depends upon the screen configuration (for
example, if you have different layouts for landscape and portrait), then
you would want onCreate() to be called every time the
configuration changes. Also, if the user changes their locale, you might
want to recreate the UI in the local language.
Q: Why doesn’t Android store every instance variable
automatically? Why do I have to write all that code myself?
A: It’s because you might not want every instance variable to be stored.
For example, you might have a variable that stores the current screen
width. You would want that variable to be recalculated the next time
onCreate() is called.
Q: You mentioned AppCompatActivity is part of Android
Jetpack. Is it in a separate library? Do I need to update the
build.gradle files?
A: AppCompatActivity is part of the AppCompat library. We’ve
not told you to update the build.gradle files because Android Studio
should have already included this library for you. If you want to doublecheck, look for an AppCompat dependency in the app build.gradle
file.
Activity Magnets
The activity below is for a new Greetings app. You enter your name in an
edit text (with the ID name), and when you click on a button (with the ID
button), the text in the text view (with the ID hello) is updated to
include your name.
When you run the app and rotate the screen, the text in the hello text
view gets lost. Use the magnets below to make sure the text gets reinstated
in this situation.
Activity Magnets Solution
The activity below is for a new Greetings app. You enter your name in an
edit text (with the ID name), and when you click on a button (with the ID
button), the text in the text view (with the ID hello) is updated to
include your name.
When you run the app and rotate the screen, the text in the hello text
view gets lost. Use the magnets below to make sure the text gets reinstated
in this situation.
There’s more to an activity’s life than create
and destroy
So far we’ve looked at the create and destroy parts of the activity lifecycle
(and a little bit in between), and you’ve seen how to deal with configuration
changes such as screen orientation. But there are other events in an
activity’s life that you might want to deal with to get the app to behave the
way you want.
As an example, suppose the stopwatch is running and you get a phone call.
Even though the stopwatch isn’t visible, it will continue running. But what
if you want the stopwatch to pause while it’s hidden, and resume once the
app is visible again?
NOTE
Even if you don’t really want your stopwatch to behave like this, just play along with us.
It’s a great excuse to look at more lifecycle methods.
Start, stop, and restart
Fortunately, it’s easy to handle actions that relate to an activity’s visibility if
you use the right lifecycle methods. In addition to the onCreate() and
onDestroy() methods, which deal with the overall lifecycle of the
activity, there are other lifecycle methods that deal with an activity’s
visibility.
Specifically, there are three key lifecycle methods that deal with when an
activity becomes visible or invisible to the user: onStart(), onStop(),
and onRestart(). Just as with onCreate() and onDestroy(),
your activity inherits them from the Android Activity class.
Here’s an overview of these methods:
An activity’s state is stopped if it’s completely hidden by another activity
and isn’t visible to the user. The activity still exists in the background
and maintains all state information.
Method When it’s called
onStart() When your activity becomes visible.
onStop() When the activity has stopped being visible. This might be because it’s
completely hidden by another activity that’s appeared on top of it, or because
the activity is about to be destroyed.
onRestart() After the activity has been made invisible, before it gets made visible again.
We’ll take a closer look at how these fit in with the onCreate() and
onDestroy() methods on the next page.
The visible lifecycle
Let’s build on the lifecycle diagram you saw earlier in the chapter, this time
including the onStart(), onStop(), and onRestart() methods (the
new bits are in black):
1. The activity gets launched, and the onCreate() method runs.
Any activity initialization code in the onCreate() method runs.
At this point, the activity isn’t yet visible, as no call to
onStart() has been made.
2. The onStart() method runs. It gets called when the activity is
about to become visible.
After the onStart() method has run, the user can see the
activity on the screen.
3. The onStop() method runs when the activity stops being visible
to the user.
After the onStop() method has run, the activity is no longer
visible.
4. If the activity becomes visible to the user again, the onRestart()
method gets called followed by onStart().
The activity may go through this cycle many times if the activity
repeatedly loses visibility and then becomes visible again.
5. Finally, the activity is destroyed.
The onStop() method will get called before onDestroy().
We need to implement two more lifecycle
methods
There are two things we need to do to update the Stopwatch app. First, we
need to implement the activity’s onStop() method so that the stopwatch
pauses when the app isn’t visible. Once we’ve done that, we need to
implement onRestart() so that the stopwatch starts again when the app
is visible.
Let’s start with the onStop() method.
When you override any activity lifecycle method in your activity, you
need to call the Activity superclass method or the compiler will
complain.
Implement onStop() to pause the stopwatch
You override the onStop() method by adding the following method to
your activity:
override fun onStop() {
 super.onStop()
 //Code to run when the activity stops
}
The line:
super.onStop()
calls the onStop() method in the Activity superclass. You need to add
this line of code whenever you override the onStop() method to make
sure the activity gets to perform any other actions in the superclass
onStop() method. If you bypass this step, Android will generate an
exception. This applies to all of the lifecycle methods; if you override any
of the Activity lifecycle methods in your activity, you must call the
superclass method or the compiler will get upset.
We need to get the stopwatch to stop if it’s running when the onStop()
method is called. To do this, we need to call the saveOffset() method
—which makes sure we can later restart the stopwatch from the same
displayed time—and then stop the stopwatch. Here’s the code:
So now the stopwatch stops when the activity is no longer visible. The next
thing we need to do is get the stopwatch to start again when the activity
becomes visible.
Restart the stopwatch when the app
becomes visible
When the activity becomes visible again, two key lifecycle methods get
called: onStart() and onRestart().
OnStart() is called when the activity is about to become visible. This
can be when the activity is first created, or when it becomes visible again
after losing its visibility.
You implement the onStart() method using code like this:
override fun onStart() {
 super.onStart()
 //Code to run when the activity starts
}
As with the onStop() method, the line:
super.onStart()
calls the onStart() method in the Activity superclass.
The onRestart() method is called before onStart(), but only when
the activity becomes visible again after previously losing visibility. It’s not
called when the activity first becomes visible.
You implement the onRestart() method using code like this:
override fun onRestart() {
 super.onRestart()
 //Code to run when the activity restarts
}
onStart() gets called whenever the activity becomes visible.
onRestart() only gets called when the activity becomes visible again
after losing visibility.
In the Stopwatch app, we want the stopwatch to start running again when
the activity regains visibility, so we’ll implement the onRestart()
method. The code looks like this:
The updated MainActivity.kt code
Here is the code for MainActivity.kt, including the onStop() and
onRestart() methods; update the code so it includes the changes below
(in bold):
What happens when you run the app
1. The user starts the app, and clicks the Start button to set the
stopwatch going.
The stopwatch starts, and the running property is set to true.
2. The user navigates to the device’s home screen so the
Stopwatch app is no longer visible.
The onStop() method gets called, the offset property is
updated, and the stopwatch is stopped.
3. The user navigates back to the Stopwatch app.
The onRestart() method gets called, the stopwatch.base
property is updated, the stopwatch starts, and the offset property
is set to 0. The stopwatch starts from the correct time.
Test Drive
When we run the app and click on the Start button the timer starts. It stops
when the app is no longer visible, and restarts when the app becomes
visible again.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q:Could we have used the onStart() method instead of
onRestart() to set the stopwatch running again?
A: Yes. When an activity becomes visible after having previously been
invisible, both onRestart() and onStart() get called, so we
could have used either method.
Q: So why did we use onRestart() and not onStart()?
A: Unlike onRestart(), onStart() also gets called when the
activity first becomes visible after it’s been created. This means that it’s
slightly more efficient to use onRestart() than it is to use
onStart().
EXERCISE
The activity code on the right changes the value of a property named x
at various stages of the activity lifecycle. See if you can determine
which lifecycle methods get called and the final value of x after each of
the actions below.
1. The user opens the app and it starts running.
2. The user opens the app and it starts running. The user then
rotates the device.
3. The user opens the app and it starts running. The user
navigates to the Android Home screen, then returns to the app.
package com.hfad.lifecycleexercise
import androidx.appcompat.app.AppCompatActivity
import android.os.Bundle
class MainActivity : AppCompatActivity() {
 var x = 0
 override fun onCreate(savedInstanceState: Bundle?) {
 super.onCreate(savedInstanceState)
 setContentView(R.layout.activity_main)
 x = savedInstanceState?.getInt("x") ?: 2
 }
 override fun onRestart() {
 super.onRestart()
 x -= 7
 }
 override fun onStart() {
 super.onStart()
 x += 6
 }
 override fun onStop() {
 super.onStop()
 x *= 2
 }
 override fun onSaveInstanceState(savedInstanceState:
Bundle) {
 savedInstanceState.putInt("x", x + 1)
 super.onSaveInstanceState(savedInstanceState)
 }
}
EXERCISE SOLUTION
The activity code on the right changes the value of a property named x
at various stages of the activity lifecycle. See if you can determine
which lifecycle methods get called and the final value of x after each of
the actions below.
1. The user opens the app and it starts running.
onCreate(): x = 2
onStart():. x = 8
The final value of x is 8.
2. The user opens the app and it starts running. The user then
rotates the device.
onCreate(): x = 2
onStart(): x = 8
onStop(): x = 16
onSaveInstanceState(): x = 16
NOTE
While onSaveInstanceState() saves a value of 17 to the
Bundle, x isn’t set until the onCreate() method runs.
onCreate(): x = 17
onStart(): x = 23
The final value of x is 23.
NOTE
Here, onRestart() doesn’t get called because the app doesn’t lose
visibility.
3. The user opens the app and it starts running. The user
navigates to the Android Home screen, then returns to the app.
onCreate(): x = 2
onStart(): x = 8
onStop(): x = 16
onRestart(): x = 9
onStart(): x = 15
The final value of x is 15.
package com.hfad.lifecycleexercise
import androidx.appcompat.app.AppCompatActivity
import android.os.Bundle
class MainActivity : AppCompatActivity() {
 var x = 0
 override fun onCreate(savedInstanceState: Bundle?) {
 super.onCreate(savedInstanceState)
 setContentView(R.layout.activity_main)
 x = savedInstanceState?.getInt("x") ?: 2
 }
 override fun onRestart() {
 super.onRestart()
 x -= 7
 }
 override fun onStart() {
 super.onStart()
 x += 6
 }
 override fun onStop() {
 super.onStop()
 x *= 2
 }
 override fun onSaveInstanceState(savedInstanceState:
Bundle) {
 savedInstanceState.putInt("x", x + 1)
 super.onSaveInstanceState(savedInstanceState)
 }
}
What if an activity is only partially visible?
So far you’ve seen what happens when an activity gets created and
destroyed, and you’ve also seen what happens when an activity becomes
visible, and when it becomes invisible. But there’s one more situation you
need to consider: when an activity is visible but doesn’t have the focus.
When an activity is visible but doesn’t have the focus, the activity is
paused. This can happen if another activity appears on top of your activity
that isn’t full-size or that’s transparent. The activity on top has the focus,
but the one underneath is still visible and is therefore paused.
An activity has a state of paused if it’s lost the focus but is still visible to
the user. The activity is still alive and maintains all its state
information.
There are two lifecycle methods that handle when the activity is paused and
when it becomes active again: onPause() and onResume().
onPause() gets called when your activity is visible but another activity
has the focus. onResume() is called immediately before your activity is
about to start interacting with the user. Let’s look at how these methods fit
in with the rest of the activity lifecycle.
The foreground lifecycle
Let’s build on the lifecycle diagram you saw earlier in the chapter, this time
including the onResume() and onPause() methods (the new bits are in
black):
1. The activity gets launched, and the onCreate() and onStart()
methods run.
At this point, the activity is visible, but it doesn’t have the focus.
2. The onResume() method runs. It gets called when the activity is
about to move into the foreground.
After the onResume() method has run, the activity has the focus
and the user can interact with it.
3. The onPause() method runs when the activity stops being in the
foreground.
After the onPause() method has run, the activity is still visible
but doesn’t have the focus.
4. If the activity moves into the foreground again, the onResume()
method gets called.
The activity may go through this cycle many times if the activity
repeatedly loses and then regains the focus.
5. If the activity stops being visible to the user, the onStop()
method gets called.
After the onStop() method has run, the activity is no longer
visible.
6. If the activity becomes visible to the user again, the onRestart()
method gets called, followed by onStart() and onResume().
The activity may go through this cycle many times.
7. Finally, the activity is destroyed.
As the activity moves from running to destroyed, the onPause()
and onStop() methods get called before the activity is
destroyed.
Pause the stopwatch if the activity’s paused
Let’s get back to the Stopwatch app.
So far we’ve made the stopwatch pause if the Stopwatch app isn’t visible,
and made it restart when the app becomes visible again. We did this by
overriding the onStop() and onRestart() methods.
Let’s get the app to have the same behavior if the app is only partially
visible. We’ll get the stopwatch to pause if the activity is paused, and start
again when the activity is resumed. So which lifecycle methods do we need
to implement?
The easy answer is that we need to use the onPause() and
onResume() methods, but we can take this one step further. We’ll use
these methods to replace the calls to onStop() and onRestart() that
we’ve already implemented.
If you look again at the lifecycle diagram, calls are made to onPause()
and onResume()—in addition to onStop(), onStart(), and
onRestart()—whenever an activity is stopped and restarted. Because
we want the app to have the same behavior irrespective of whether the
activity has been paused or stopped, we can use the onPause() and
onResume() methods for both situations.
You implement the onPause() and onResume() methods using code
like this:
override fun onPause() {
 super.onPause()
 //Code to run when the activity pauses
}
override fun onResume() {
 super.onResume()
 //Code to run when the activity resumes
}
As before, the calls to super.onPause() and super.onResume()
are mandatory. They call the onPause() and onResume() methods in
the Activity superclass, and without these method calls, the code won’t
compile.
We want to replace the onStop() and onRestart() methods in
MainActivity.kt with implementations of onPause() and onResume().
See if you can figure out the required code changes by having a go at the
following exercise.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL
We want the stopwatch to pause each time MainActivity loses the
focus, and start when it regains it. Update the MainActivity.kt code
below to include the required code changes.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL SOLUTION
We want the stopwatch to pause each time MainActivity loses the
focus, and start when it regains it. Update the MainActivity.kt code
below to include the required code changes.
The complete MainActivity.kt code
Here’s the full MainActivity.kt code for the finished app; update your code
to include the changes (in bold):
Before we take the app for a test drive, let’s go through what happens when
the code runs.
What happens when you run the app
1. The user starts the app, and clicks the Start button to set the
stopwatch going.
The stopwatch starts and the running property is set to true.
2. Another activity appears in the foreground, leaving
MainActivity partially visible.
The onPause() method gets called, the offset property is
updated, and the stopwatch is stopped.
3. MainActivity returns to the foreground.
The onResume() method gets called, the stopwatch.base
property is updated, the stopwatch starts, and the offset property
is set to 0. The stopwatch starts from the correct time.
Test Drive
When we run the app and click on the Start button, the timer starts; it
pauses when the app is partially obscured by another activity; and it starts
again when the app is back in the foreground.
Congratulations! You’ve built a working Stopwatch app, and learned how to
use Android’s activity lifecycle methods to take control of your app’s
behavior.
Your handy guide to the activity lifecycle
methods
Method When it’s called Next method
onCreate() When the activity is first created. Use it for normal
setup, such as creating views. It also gives you a Bundl
e that contains the previously saved state of the activity.
onStart()
onRestart() When your activity has been stopped but just before it
gets started again.
onStart()
onStart() When your activity is becoming visible. It’s followed by
onResume() if the activity comes into the foreground,
or onStop() if the activity is made invisible.
onResume() or o
nStop()
onResume() When your activity is in the foreground. onPause()
onPause() When your activity is no longer in the foreground
because another activity is resuming. The next activity
isn’t resumed until this method finishes, so any code in
this method needs to be quick. It’s followed by onResu
me() if the activity returns to the foreground, or onSto
p() if it becomes invisible.
onResume() or o
nStop()
onStop() When the activity is no longer visible. This can be
because another activity is covering it, or because this
activity is being destroyed. It’s followed by onRestar
t() if the activity becomes visible again, or onDestro
y() if the activity is being destroyed.
onRestart() or
onDestroy()
onDestroy() When your activity is about to be destroyed or because
the activity is finishing.
None
BE the Activity
On the right, you’ll see some activity code. Your job is to play like
you’re the activity and say which code will run in each of the situations
below. We’ve labeled the code we want you to consider. We’ve done the
first one to start you off.
User starts the activity and starts using it.
Code segments A, G, D. The activity is created, then made
visible, then receives the focus.
User starts the activity, starts using it, then switches to another app.
User starts the activity, starts using it, rotates the device, switches to
another app, then goes back to the activity.
NOTE
This one’s tough.
BE the Activity Solution
On the right, you’ll see some activity code. Your job is to play like
you’re the activity and say which code will run in each of the situations
below. We’ve labeled the code we want you to consider. We’ve done the
first one to start you off.
User starts the activity and starts using it.
Code segments A, G, D. The activity is created, then made
visible, then receives the focus.
User starts the activity, starts using it, then switches to another app.
Code segments A, G, D, B, E. The activity is created, then made
visible, then receives the focus. When the user switches to
another app, it loses the focus and is no longer visible to the
user.
User starts the activity, starts using it, rotates the device, switches to
another app, then goes back to the activity.
Code segments A, G, D, B, E, H, A, G, D, B, E, C, G, D. First,
the activity is created, made visible, and receives the focus.
When the device is rotated, the activity loses the focus, stops
being visible, and is destroyed. It’s then created again, made
visible, and receives the focus. When the user switches to
another app and back again, the activity loses the focus, loses
visibility, becomes visible again, and regains the focus.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 5 under your belt and now you’ve added the
activity lifecycle to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
The Chronometer view implements a simple timer.
Chronometer is a subclass of TextView.
A device configuration change results in the activity being
destroyed and recreated.
Your activity inherits the lifecycle methods from the
android.app.Activity class. If you override any of
these methods, you need to call up to the method in the
superclass.
onSaveInstanceState(Bundle) enables your activity
to save its state before the activity gets destroyed. You can use
the Bundle to restore state in onCreate().
You add values to a Bundle in
onSaveInstanceState() using bundle.put...
("name", value).
You retrieve values from the bundle in onCreate() using
bundle.get...("name").
onCreate() and onDestroy() deal with the birth and
death of the activity.
onRestart(), onStart(), and onStop() deal with the
visibility of the activity.
onResume() and onPause() get called when the activity
gains and loses the focus.
Chapter 6. Fragments and
Navigation: Finding Your Way
Most apps require more than one screen.
So far, we’ve just looked at how to create single-screen apps, which is fine
for simple applications. But what if you have more complex
requirements? In this chapter, you’ll learn how to use fragments and the
Navigation component to build multi-screen apps. You’ll learn how
fragments are like subactivities with their own methods. You’ll find out
how to design effective navigation graphs. Finally, you’ll meet the
navigation host and navigation controller, and learn how they help you
navigate from place to place.
Most apps need more than one screen
All of the apps you’ve built so far have one thing in common: they each
have a single screen. Each app has a single activity with a corresponding
layout, which defines the app’s appearance, and how the user can interact
with it.
Most apps, however, contain more than one screen. An email app, for
example, might have one screen that lets you compose an email, and
another that displays a list of emails you’ve received. A calendar app might
display a list of events on one screen, and the details of one specific event
on another.
We’re going to show you how to build multi-screen apps by creating a
Secret Message app. The app will comprise of a welcome screen, a second
screen which allows the user to enter a message, and a third which displays
an encrypted version of the message.
Here’s what the app will look like:
Each screen is a fragment
The Secret Message app has three distinct screens, and we’re going to build
each screen as a separate fragment. A fragment is like a kind of subactivity
that’s displayed inside an activity’s layout. It has Kotlin code that controls
its behavior, and an associated layout that defines its appearance.
Here are the three fragments that the app will use:
A fragment has Kotlin code that controls its behavior, and a layout that
specifies its appearance.
WelcomeFragment
This is the app’s main screen. It needs to display some introductory text,
and a button. The button will be used to navigate to the next screen—
MessageFragment.
MessageFragment
This screen will let the user enter a message into an edit text. When the user
clicks on its button, the app will navigate to EncryptFragment.
EncryptFragment
This is the final screen. It encrypts the user’s message, and displays the
result.
As you can see, the user needs to be able to navigate between all three
fragments. So how will this work?
Navigate between screens using the
Navigation component
The best way of navigating between fragments is to use Android’s
Navigation component. The Navigation component is part of Android
Jetpack, and it helps you implement navigation in a standard way.
To use the Navigation component in the Secret Message app, we’ll include
a single activity named MainActivity. As the user navigates through
the app, the activity will display each fragment in turn like this:
You’ll find out more about fragments and the Navigation component as we
build the Secret Message app. Let’s go through the steps we’ll take to create
it.
Here’s what we’re going to do
We’re going to start building the Secret Message app in this chapter, and
complete it in the next.
Here’s what we’ll do in this chapter:
1. Create and display WelcomeFragment.
In this step, we’ll create WelcomeFragment, which will be the
app’s first screen. We’ll display this fragment in
MainActivity’s layout so the user sees it when the app
launches.
2. Navigate to MessageFragment.
We’ll create a second fragment named MessageFragment, and
navigate to it when the user clicks on a button in
WelcomeFragment’s layout. We’ll use Android’s Navigation
component to implement navigation.
Let’s start by creating a new project for the app.
Create a new project
We’re going to use a new project for the Secret Message app, so create one
now using the same steps you used in the previous chapters. Choose the
Empty Activity option, enter a name of “Secret Message” and a package
name of “com.hfad.secretmessage”, and accept the default save location.
Make sure the language is set to Kotlin and the minimum SDK is API 21 so
it will run on most Android devices.
Add some String resources
Before we create any fragments, we’re going to add some String
resources to the project. We’ll use these to display text in the fragments’
layouts, such as the labels for buttons, and the welcome message on the first
screen.
To add the Strings, open the file strings.xml in the
SecretMessage/app/src/main/res/values folder, and then add the following
resources (in bold) to the file:
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Why are we using fragments? Can’t you create a multi-screen
app using multiple activities instead?
A: Yes, it’s possible to create multi-screen apps using multiple
activities, and up until a few years ago, this is how you’d typically
develop apps of this kind.
Since releasing Android’s Navigation component, the Android team
recommends using fragments instead. The Navigation component is
primarily designed to work with fragments, so this is now the standard
way of implementing navigation.
Add WelcomeFragment to the project
We’re going to add a fragment named WelcomeFragment to the project.
WelcomeFragment will be the first screen that the user sees when she
opens the app, and we’ll use it to display some introductory text about the
app, and a button.
To add the fragment, highlight the com.hfad.secretmessage package in the
app/src/main/java folder in the project explorer, go to the File menu, and
choose New→Fragment→Fragment (Blank).
You will be asked how you want to configure the new fragment. Name the
fragment “WelcomeFragment”, and give its layout a name of
“fragment_welcome”. Then make sure the language is set to Kotlin, and
click on the Finish button.
When you click on the Finish button, Android Studio creates the new
fragment and adds it to the project.
What fragment code looks like
When you create a new fragment, Android Studio adds two files to your
project: a Kotlin file that controls the fragment’s behavior, and a layout file
that describes the fragment’s appearance.
We’ll look at the Kotlin code first. Go to the com.hfad.secretmessage
package in the app/src/main/java folder and open the file
WelcomeFragment.kt. Then replace the code that Android Studio generated
with the code below:
Fragment code looks similar to activity code
The above code defines a basic fragment. As you can see, the code for a
fragment looks very similar to activity code. Instead of extending
AppCompatActivity, however, it extends Fragment.
The androidx.fragment.app.Fragment class is part of Android
Jetpack, and it’s used to define a basic fragment. It includes the latest
fragment features, while being backward compatible with older versions of
Android.
The fragment overrides the onCreateView() method, which gets called
as soon as Android needs the fragment’s layout. Nearly every fragment
overrides this method, so let’s look at it in more detail.
The fragment’s onCreateView() method
The onCreateView() method gets called when Android needs access to
the fragment’s layout. Overriding this method is optional, but as you need
to implement it each time you define a fragment with a layout, you’ll
override it for nearly every fragment you create.
The method takes three parameters:
The first parameter is a LayoutInflater that you use to inflate the
fragment’s layout. As you learned in Chapter 3, inflating a layout turns its
XML views into objects.
The second parameter is a ViewGroup?. This is the ViewGroup in the
activity’s layout that displays the fragment.
NOTE
You’ll find out more about this a few pages ahead.
The final parameter is a Bundle?. This is used if you’ve previously saved
the fragment’s state, and want to reinstate it. It works in a similar way to the
Bundle? parameter that’s passed to an activity’s onCreate() method.
Inflate the fragment’s layout, and return it
The onCreateView() method returns a View?, which is an inflated
version of the fragment’s layout.
You inflate the layout using the LayoutInflater’s inflate()
method like this:
override fun onCreateView(inflater: LayoutInflater, container:
ViewGroup?,
 savedInstanceState: Bundle?): View? {
 return inflater.inflate(R.layout.fragment_welcome, container,
false)
}
The above code is the fragment equivalent of calling an activity’s
setContentView() method, as it’s used to inflate the fragment’s layout
into a hierarchy of View objects. The above code, for example, inflates
WelcomeFragment’s layout fragment_welcome.xml.
Once the fragment’s layout has been inflated, the View hierarchy is
inserted into the activity’s layout, and displayed.
Now that you’ve seen WelcomeFragment’s Kotlin code, let’s take a look
at its layout.
Fragment layout code looks like activity
layout code
As we said earlier, fragments use layout files to describe their appearance.
There’s no difference between activity layout and fragment layout code, so
you can use any of the views and view groups in your fragment layout
code that you’re already familiar with.
We’re going to replace the default layout code Android Studio has
generated for us with a linear layout containing a text view that displays a
brief description of the app, and a button that we’ll use to navigate to a
different fragment later in the chapter.
Open the file fragment_welcome.xml in the app/src/main/res/layout folder,
and replace its contents with the code below:
That’s all the code we need for WelcomeFragment (and its layout) for
now, so let’s find out how to display it in the app.
You display a fragment in a
FragmentContainerView
To display a fragment, you need to add it to an activity’s layout. In this app,
for example, we’re going to display WelcomeFragment by adding it to
MainActivity’s layout file activity_main.xml.
You add a fragment to a layout using a FragmentContainerView.
This is a type of FrameLayout that’s used to display fragments, and you
add it to a layout file using code like this:
You specify which fragment you want to display by setting the
FragmentContainerView’s android:name attribute to the fully
qualified fragment name, including its package. In the Secret Message app,
we want to display the fragment named WelcomeFragment that’s in the
com.hfad.secretmessage package, so we’re setting the android:name
attribute using:
android:name="com.hfad.secretmessage.WelcomeFragment"
When Android creates the activity’s layout, it populates the
FragmentContainerView with the View object returned by the
fragment’s onCreateView() method. This View is the fragment’s user
interface, so you can think of the FragmentContainerView as a
placeholder for where the fragment’s layout should be inserted:
Now that you know how to add a fragment to a layout, let’s add
WelcomeFragment to MainActivity’s layout.
Update the activity_main.xml code
We want MainActivity to display WelcomeFragment, which means
we need to add a FragmentContainerView to its layout.
Here’s the full code for activity_main.xml: replace the code so that it
includes the changes shown here:
The full code for MainActivity.kt
We don’t need to add any extra Kotlin code to MainActivity to make it
display a fragment because the layout’s FragmentContainerView
handles everything. You just need to make sure that the code in
MainActivity.kt looks like this:
Let’s see what happens when the app runs.
What the code does
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. When the app is launched, MainActivity gets created.
2. MainActivity’s onCreate() method runs.
The onCreate() method specifies that activity_main.xml should
be used for MainActivity’s layout.
3. activity_main.xml includes a FragmentContainerView.
Its android:name attribute specifies that it needs to display
WelcomeFragment.
4. WelcomeFragment’s onCreateView() method is called, which
inflates its layout.
WelcomeFragment’s inflated view hierarchy is added to the
FragmentContainerView in MainActivity’s layout.
5. Finally, MainActivity is displayed on the device.
As the FragmentContainerView includes
WelcomeFragment, this fragment is displayed on the screen.
Now that you’ve seen what happens when the code runs, let’s take the app
for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the Secret Message app, MainActivity is launched. The
FragmentContainerView in MainActivity’s layout includes
WelcomeFragment, so the fragment’s layout is displayed on the device.
You’ve now learned how to create and display a fragment. Before we build
a second fragment and learn how to navigate to it, have a go at the
following exercise.
Pool Puzzle
Your job is to take code snippets from the pool and place them into the
blank lines in the linear layout. You may not use the same code snippet
more than once, and you won’t need to use all the snippets. Your goal is to
make the linear layout display two fragments, AFragment and
BFragment, so that it displays the screen shown on the right. Hint: both
fragments are in a package named com.hfad.exercise.
NOTE
Note: each thing from the pool can only be used once!
Pool Puzzle Solution
Your job is to take code snippets from the pool and place them into the
blank lines in the linear layout. You may not use the same code snippet
more than once, and you won’t need to use all the snippets. Your goal is to
make the linear layout display two fragments, AFragment and
BFragment, so that it displays the screen shown on the right. Hint: both
fragments are in a package named com.hfad.exercise.
Create MessageFragment
So far, we’ve created a fragment named WelcomeFragment, which is
displayed in MainActivity’s layout. Next, we’ll create a new fragment
named MessageFragment, which we’ll navigate to when the user clicks
on WelcomeFragment’s Start button.
We’ll add MessageFragment in the same way we added
WelcomeFragment. Highlight the com.hfad.secretmessage package in
the app/src/main/java folder in the project explorer, go to the File menu,
and choose New→Fragment→Fragment (Blank). Name the fragment
“MessageFragment” and its layout “fragment_message”, and make sure the
language is set to Kotlin. Then click on the Finish button to add the
fragment and its layout to the project.
Update MessageFragment’s layout
When you create MessageFragment, Android Studio adds two new files
to your project: MessageFragment.kt (which specifies the fragment’s
behavior), and fragment_message.xml (which defines its appearance). We’ll
update both of these files, starting with the layout.
The fragment needs to have an edit text to let the user enter a message, and
a button which, later on, will be used for navigation. You’re already familiar
with the code to add these views, so update the code in
fragment_message.xml so it matches the code shown here:
That’s all the code we need for MessageFragment’s layout, so let’s go
and update its Kotlin code.
Update MessageFragment.kt
MessageFragment’s Kotlin code defines the fragment’s behavior. For
now, all we need to do is make sure Android Studio hasn’t added any
unnecessary extra code to it that might stop it from working in the way we
want.
Go to the com.hfad.secretmessage package in the app/src/main/java folder
and open the file MessageFragment.kt. Then replace the code that Android
Studio has generated with the code below:
The above code is everything that MessageFragment.kt needs to define a
basic fragment. Just like the code you saw for WelcomeFragment, it
extends the Fragment class, and overrides its onCreateView()
method. This method inflates the fragment’s layout, and returns its root
view. It gets called whenever the app needs to display the fragment.
We’ve now finished writing all the layout and Kotlin code that
MessageFragment needs. Next, we need to make WelcomeFragment
navigate to it. So how is this done?
Use the Navigation component to navigate
between fragments
As we said earlier in the chapter, the standard way of navigating between
fragments is to use Android’s Navigation component.
The Navigation component is part of Android Jetpack, and it’s a suite of
libraries, plug-ins, and tools that you add to your project. It’s extremely
flexible, and simplifies many of the complexities of fragment navigation—
such as fragment transactions and back stack manipulation—which were
previously much harder to implement.
Navigating between fragments is comprised of three main parts:
A navigation graph
The navigation graph holds all of the navigation-related
information that your app requires, and describes the possible paths
the user can take when navigating the app.
The navigation graph is an XML resource, but you usually edit it
using a visual design editor.
A navigation host
A navigation host is an empty container that’s used to display the
fragment you navigate to. You add the navigation host to your
activity’s layout.
A navigation controller
The navigation controller controls which fragment is displayed in
the navigation host as the user navigates through the app. You
interact with the navigation controller using Kotlin code.
We’re going to use all three of these to implement navigation in the Secret
Message app. First, let’s add the Navigation component’s library to the
project.
Use Gradle to add the Navigation component
to your project
As you learned in Chapter 4, you add any extra libraries, tools, and plug-ins
your app needs by making changes to the build.gradle files. When you
create a new project, Android Studio automatically includes two of these
files for you: one for the project, and another for the app.
To add the Navigation component, you need to edit both versions of
build.gradle. Let’s begin by updating the project version.
Add a version number to the project build.gradle file
We’ll begin by adding a new variable to the project’s build.gradle file that
specifies which version of the Navigation component we’re going to use.
Using a variable for this version number means that if we add any extra
Navigation component libraries (which we’ll do in the next chapter), the
version number for each library will stay nice and consistent.
To add the variable, open the file SecretMessage/build.gradle, and add the
following line (in bold) to the buildscript section:
WATCH IT!
Always click on the Sync Now option after updating the build.gradle
files.
Any changes you make (such as adding libraries) don’t come into effect
until you sync them.
Add a dependency to the app build.gradle file
Next, you need to add a library dependency to the app’s version of the
build.gradle file.
Open the file SecretMessage/app/build.gradle, and add the following line
(in bold) to the dependencies section:
Once you’ve made these changes, click on the Sync Now option that
appears at the top of the code editor. This syncs the changes you’ve made
with the rest of your project, and adds the library.
Create a navigation graph
Now that we’ve added the Navigation component’s main library to the
Secret Message project, we can implement navigation.
We’ll start by adding a navigation graph to the project. Select the
SecretMessage/app/src/main/res folder in the project explorer, and then
choose File→New→Android Resource File. When prompted, enter a file
name of “nav_graph”, choose a resource type of “Navigation”, and click on
the OK button. This adds an empty navigation graph file named
nav_graph.xml to the SecretMessage/app/src/main/res/navigation folder.
Once you’ve created the new navigation graph, open it (if it’s not open
already) by double-clicking on the nav_graph.xml file in the project
explorer. The file should open in the navigation graph design editor, which
looks like this:
Add fragments to the navigation graph
We want the user to be able to navigate from WelcomeFragment to
MessageFragment, so we need to add these fragments to the navigation
graph as destinations. A destination is a screen in the app—usually a
fragment—which the user can navigate to.
We’ll add WelcomeFragment first, as this is the first screen we want the
user to see when the app launches. Click on the New Destination button at
the top of the design editor, and when prompted, select the option for
“fragment_welcome” (WelcomeFragment’s layout). This adds
WelcomeFragment to the navigation graph, so it looks like this:
Next, add MessageFragment to the navigation graph by clicking on the
New Destination button, and selecting the “fragment_message” option. This
adds the second fragment to the navigation graph like so:
Connect fragments using an action
We next need to specify that the user can navigate from
WelcomeFragment to MessageFragment, and this is done with an
action. Actions are used to connect destinations in the navigation graph,
and they define possible paths the user can take when navigating through
the app.
We’re going to add an action that goes from WelcomeFragment to
MessageFragment, as this is the direction in which we want the user to
navigate through the app. Hover your mouse pointer over
WelcomeFragment in the design editor, then click on the circle that
appears on its right edge, and drag it to MessageFragment. This draws
an arrow—the action—between the two fragments:
Every action needs a unique ID
Every action must have a unique ID. Android uses this ID to determine
which destination needs to be displayed as the user navigates through the
app.
Each time you create an action, Android Studio assigns it a default ID. You
can edit this ID—and any other of the action’s properties—using the
Attributes panel on the right of the navigation graph.
You want the action you just created to have an ID of
“action_welcomeFragment_to_messageFragment” so that it matches the
code in this chapter. Make sure this is the case by selecting the action (the
arrow) in the design editor, and checking the value of its id attribute in the
Attributes panel. You’ll use this ID a few pages ahead.
Navigation graphs are XML resources
Just like a layout, a navigation graph is really just a bunch of XML code. To
view the code, click on the Code button at the top of the design editor.
Here’s the underlying XML code for the Secret Message app’s navigation
graph nav_graph.xml:
As you can see, nav_graph.xml has a root element of <navigation>,
and contains two <fragment> elements: one for WelcomeFragment,
and another for MessageFragment. The <fragment> element for
WelcomeFragment includes an extra <action> element, which
denotes the action we just added.
Now that we’ve created the navigation graph, let’s move onto the next part
of the Navigation component.
Navigation graphs are usually edited using the design editor, but it can
still be useful to check the XML.
Add a navigation host to the layout using a
FragmentContainerView
As we said earlier, the Navigation component is comprised of three main
parts: a navigation graph that defines the possible navigation paths, a
navigation host that displays destinations, and a navigation controller that
controls which destination is displayed. We’ve just created a navigation
graph, so the next thing we’ll add is the navigation host.
You add a navigation host by including one in the activity’s layout. The
great news is that the Navigation component comes with a built-in one
named NavHostFragment so you don’t have to write one yourself. It’s a
subclass of Fragment that implements the NavHost interface.
As NavHostFragment is a type of fragment, you add it to a layout file
using a FragmentContainerView. The code looks like this:
The above code is like the FragmentContainerView code you’ve seen
before, but it includes two extra attributes: app:navGraph and
app:defaultNavHost.
The app:navGraph attribute tells the navigation host which navigation
graph to use, in this case nav_graph.xml. The navigation graph specifies
which fragment to display first (its start destination) and lets the user
navigate between its destinations.
The app:defaultNavHost attribute lets the navigation host interact
with the device back button: you’ll find out more about this in the next
chapter.
Add a NavHostFragment to activity_main.xml
We’re going to add a navigation host to MainActivity’s layout that uses
the navigation graph we created. To do this, update the code in
activity_main.xml so it includes the changes below (in bold).
We need to navigate between the fragments
We’ve now created a navigation graph, and linked it to a navigation host
that’s held in a FragmentContainerView in MainActivity’s
layout. When the app runs, WelcomeFragment—which is the navigation
graph’s start destination—will be displayed.
The final thing we need to do in this chapter is navigate from
WelcomeFragment to MessageFragment when the user clicks on the
Start button in WelcomeFragment’s layout. Let’s find out how this is
done.
Add an OnClickListener to the button
To navigate from WelcomeFragment to MessageFragment, we first
need to make WelcomeFragment’s Start button respond to clicks. We’ll
do this by adding an OnClickListener to it.
Previously, you added OnClickListener to an activity’s button by
getting a reference to it with findViewById(), and then calling its
setOnClickListener method. You included this code in the activity’s
onCreate() method as this is where it first has access to the views in its
layout.
When you want to add an OnClickListener to a fragment’s button,
however, things are slightly different.
Fragment OnClickListener code is a little different
The first difference is that you add an OnClickListener to a fragment’s
button in the fragment’s onCreateView() method, not onCreate().
This is because a fragment first has access to its views in
onCreateView(), so it’s the best place to set any
OnClickListeners.
The second difference is the Fragment class doesn’t include a
findViewById() method, so you can’t directly call it to get a reference
to any views. You can, however, call findViewById() on the
fragment’s root view instead.
Here’s what the code looks like to add an OnClickListener to a view
in fragment code: we’ll add this to WelcomeFragment a couple pages
ahead:
Now that you know how to add an OnClickListener to a fragment’s
button, let’s make it navigate when clicked.
The Fragment class isn’t a subclass of Activity.
Even though fragments have a lot in common with activities, the
Fragment class doesn’t extend Activity so it doesn’t inherit any of its
methods.
Instead, the Fragment class defines its own set of methods. While many
of these look identical to the ones that activities inherit, it doesn’t include
methods like findViewById().
You’ll find out more about fragments and their methods as we go through
the book. For now, let’s see what code we need to add to
WelcomeFragment so that it navigates to MessageFragment when
its button gets clicked.
Get a navigation controller
Each time you want to navigate to a new fragment, you first need to get a
reference to a navigation controller. You do this by calling the
findNavController() method on its root View object. The following
code, for example, gets a reference to the navigation controller associated
with a root view object named view:
val navController = view.findNavController()
Tell it where to navigate with an action
Once you have a navigation controller, you ask it to navigate to a new
destination by calling its navigate() method. This method takes one
parameter: a navigation action ID.
As you may recall, when we created the navigation graph, we included an
action that went from WelcomeFragment to MessageFragment. We
gave this action the ID “action_welcomeFragment_to_messageFragment”.
If we pass this ID to the navigation controller’s navigate() method, the
controller will see that the action goes from WelcomeFragment to
MessageFragment, and use it to navigate to the new fragment.
Here’s what the code looks like:
We want to navigate to MessageFragment when the user clicks on
WelcomeFragment’s Start button. We’ll therefore add this code to the
Start button’s OnClickListener like this:
We’ll show you the full WelcomeFragment code on the next page.
The full code for WelcomeFragment.kt
Below is the complete code for WelcomeFragment; update
WelcomeFragment.kt so it includes the changes (in bold):
That’s all the code we need to make WelcomeFragment navigate to
MessageFragment. Let’s go through what the code does when it runs,
and then take the app for a test drive.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. The app is launched and MainActivity gets created.
2. MainActivity’s layout, activity_main.xml, includes a
FragmentContainerView that specifies a navigation host and a
navigation graph.
3. The start destination in the navigation graph is
WelcomeFragment, so this fragment is added to the navigation
host and displayed on the device screen.
4. The user clicks on the Start button in WelcomeFragment’s
layout.
5. The code for the Start button’s OnClickListener finds the
navigation controller, and calls its navigate() method.
It passes it the action used to navigate from WelcomeFragment
to MessageFragment.
6. The navigation controller looks for the action with this ID in
the navigation graph.
It sees that the action goes from WelcomeFragment to
MessageFragment.
7. The navigation controller replaces WelcomeFragment with
MessageFragment in the navigation host, and
MessageFragment is displayed on the device screen.
Test Drive
When we run the app, MainActivity is launched, and
WelcomeFragment is displayed as before.
When we click on the Start button, the app navigates to
MessageFragment, and this fragment is displayed on the device.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to build a multi-screen app that
lets you navigate from one screen to another.
You’ll build on this knowledge in the next chapter when we finish building
the Secret Message app.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: I tried creating a navigation graph before editing the
build.gradle files, and Android Studio offered to add the Navigation
component library for me. Why are we adding the libraries
manually?
A: It’s so you can see what libraries are needed, and how to include
them, without relying on Android Studio.
Another reason is we know the code in this book works with the library
version we’ve specified in the build.gradle files. Android Studio may
include a different version, which might break the code.
Q: Do I have to implement navigation using the Navigation
component?
A: Strictly speaking, no, but it’s far more complicated if you don’t.
Before the Navigation component was introduced, navigating between
screens required a lot more code.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL
The diagram below shows part of the navigation graph for a music app.
It describes two navigation paths: one that goes from
ChooseMusicFragment to FoundFragment, and another that
goes from ChooseMusicFragment to NotFoundFragment.
Complete ChooseMusicFragment’s onCreateView() method
so that if the musicFound() method returns true, the app displays
FoundFragment, and if the method returns false, the app displays
NotFoundFragment instead.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL SOLUTION
The diagram below shows part of the navigation graph for a music app.
It describes two navigation paths: one that goes from
ChooseMusicFragment to FoundFragment, and another that
goes from ChooseMusicFragment to NotFoundFragment.
Complete ChooseMusicFragment’s onCreateView() method
so that if the musicFound() method returns true, the app displays
FoundFragment, and if the method returns false, the app displays
NotFoundFragment instead.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 6 under your belt and now you’ve added fragments
and navigation to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
A fragment has Kotlin code and a layout.
Every fragment extends the Fragment class or one of its
subclasses.
Add a fragment to an activity’s layout using a
FragmentContainerView.
onCreateView() gets called each time Android needs the
fragment’s layout.
The Fragment class doesn’t extend Activity.
Fragments don’t have a findViewById() method.
The Navigation component is a suite of libraries, plug-ins, and
tools which you add to your project using Gradle.
A navigation graph describes possible destinations and
navigation paths. It uses actions to describe these paths.
A navigation host is an empty container used to display the
fragment you navigate to. The Navigation component comes
with a default navigation host named NavHostFragment,
which extends the Fragment class and implements the
NavHost interface.
A navigation controller uses actions to control which fragment
is displayed in the navigation host.
Chapter 7. Safe Args: Passing
Information
Sometimes fragments need extra information to work properly.
If a fragment shows details of a contact, for example, it needs to know
which contact to display. But what if this information need extra
information to work properly.comes from another fragment? In this
chapter, you’ll build on your navigation know-how by learning how to
pass data between fragments. You’ll find out how to add arguments to
navigation destinations so they can receive the information they need.
You’ll meet the Safe Args plug-in, and learn how to use it to write typesafe code. Finally, you’ll discover how to manipulate the back stack, and
take control of back button behavior. Read on—there’s no going back…
The Secret Message app navigates between
fragments
In the previous chapter, you learned how to use the Navigation component
to navigate between two fragments. You used this knowledge to build the
first half of the Secret Message app: an app that takes a message the user
enters, and encrypts it.
The current version of the app uses a fragment named
WelcomeFragment to display some introductory text. When the user
clicks on its Start button, the fragment navigates to a second fragment
named MessageFragment.
MessageFragment includes an edit text that lets the user enter her
message. It also features a Next button, which the user clicks on to encrypt
the message.
Here’s a reminder of what the app currently looks like:
In the current version of the app, nothing happens when the user clicks on
MessageFragment’s Next button. In this chapter, we’re going to finish
building the app so the user’s encrypted message gets displayed in a new
fragment.
MessageFragment needs to pass the
message to a new fragment
We’re going to add a new fragment to the app named
EncryptFragment. This fragment will display the user’s encrypted
message, and will look like this:
EncryptFragment will get the user’s message from
MessageFragment. When the user clicks on MessageFragment’s
Next button, the app will navigate to EncryptFragment, and pass it the
text. This fragment will then encrypt the text, and display the result:
To make this work, we need to be able to pass data between fragments. The
best way of doing this is with a Gradle plug-in called Safe Args, which is
an extra part of the Navigation component. It gives you a way of passing
data between fragments in a way that’s type-safe. This prevents you from
accidentally passing the wrong type of data, which might cause runtime
errors.
You’ll learn more about using Safe Args as we continue building the Secret
Message app. For now, let’s look at the steps we’ll go through.
Here’s what we’re going to do
Here are the steps we’ll go through to build the second half of the Secret
Message app:
1. Create and display EncryptFragment.
We’ll create a new fragment named EncryptFragment, and
navigate to it when the user clicks on the Next button in
MessageFragment’s layout.
2. Pass the user’s message to EncryptFragment.
We’ll use Safe Args to pass the user’s message from
MessageFragment to EncryptFragment.
EncryptFragment will then display the encrypted message.
3. Modify the app’s back button behavior.
Finally, we’ll update the app so that when the user presses the
device back button while EncryptFragment is displayed, the
app goes back to WelcomeFragment.
Let’s get started.
Create EncryptFragment…
We’re going to use EncryptFragment to display an encrypted version
of the user’s message. Create this fragment by highlighting the
com.hfad.secretmessage package in the app/src/main/java folder, going to
the File menu, and choosing New→Fragment→Fragment (Blank). Name
the fragment “EncryptFragment” and give the layout a name of
“fragment_encrypt”. Make sure the language is set to Kotlin, then click on
the Finish button.
…and update its layout
We’re going to update EncryptFragment’s layout so that it includes
two text views. The first will display a String resource named
encrypt_text (we added this to strings.xml in the previous chapter),
and the second will display the encrypted message.
Open the layout file fragment_encrypt.xml and update its contents so it
matches the code below:
Update EncryptFragment.kt
We also need to update EncryptFragment’s Kotlin code to make sure
that Android Studio hasn’t added any unnecessary extra code to it that
might stop it from working in the way we want.
Go to the com.hfad.secretmessage package in the app/src/main/java folder
and open the file EncryptFragment.kt. Then replace the code that Android
Studio has generated with the code shown here:
The above code is everything that EncryptFragment.kt needs to define a
basic fragment. Just like the other fragment code you’ve seen, it extends the
Fragment class, and overrides its onCreateView() method. This
method inflates the fragment’s layout, and returns its root view.
We’ve now finished writing all the layout and Kotlin code that
EncryptFragment needs. Next, we’ll make sure that
MessageFragment can navigate to it by adding it to the navigation
graph.
Add EncryptFragment to the navigation
graph
As you already know, the navigation graph holds details of the app’s
destinations, and the possible paths you can take to navigate to them.
To add EncryptFragment to the navigation graph, open nav_graph.xml,
click on the New Destination button in the design editor, and when
prompted, choose the “fragment_encrypt” option. This adds the fragment.
We also need to add a new action so that MessageFragment can
navigate to EncryptFragment. Do this by hovering your mouse pointer
over MessageFragment and drawing an action arrow from its right edge
to EncryptFragment. Make sure the action has an ID of
“action_messageFragment_to_encryptFragment” so that it matches the code
in this book.
NOTE
Don’t worry if you find this a bit too fiddly. We’ll show you the full code on the next
page so if you prefer, you can update that instead.
After you’ve made these changes, the navigation graph should look
something like this:
Let’s see what the underlying XML looks like.
The updated nav_graph.xml code
Each time you update the navigation graph, any changes are added to the
underlying XML. The new code looks like this (the changes are in bold):
Let’s use the new action to navigate to EncryptFragment.
MessageFragment needs to navigate to
EncryptFragment
We need to make MessageFragment navigate to EncryptFragment
when the user clicks its Next button. To enable this, we’ll add an
OnClickListener to the button, which will include the navigation
code.
As you learned in the previous chapter, you navigate from one fragment to
another by getting a navigation controller, and passing it a navigation
action. The navigation controller uses this action to display the correct
fragment.
You’re already familiar with all the code needed to do this, so update
MessageFragment.kt so that it includes the changes shown here (in bold):
Let’s take the app for a test drive and make sure this works.
Test Drive
When we run the app, MainActivity is launched, and
WelcomeFragment is displayed. When we click on its Start button, the
app navigates to MessageFragment as before.
When we enter a message in MessageFragment’s edit text view and
click on its Next button, the app navigates to EncryptFragment. It
doesn’t do anything with the message we entered.
EncryptFragment doesn’t display an encrypted message because the
code we’ve written so far simply navigates to this fragment. It doesn’t pass
the message to the new fragment, so EncryptFragment can’t do
anything with it.
To pass the message from MessageFragment to EncryptFragment,
we’re going to use Safe Args. As you learned earlier, this is an extra part of
the Navigation component that lets you pass arguments to destinations in a
type-safe way.
Let’s find out how this is done.
Add Safe Args to the build.gradle files
Before we can start using Safe Args, we need to update the project and app
build.gradle files. Let’s do this now.
Add a classpath to the project build.gradle file
You first need to add a new classpath to the project’s build.gradle file
specifying that you want to use the Safe Args plug-in. The classpath
includes a version number, which needs to match the one that you’re using
for the main Navigation component library.
In the Secret Message app, we’re using a variable named nav_version
to make sure that these version numbers match, so we’ll reference this in
the classpath.
Open the file SecretMessage/build.gradle, and add the classpath (in bold) to
the dependencies section:
Add the plug-in to the app build.gradle file
Next, you need to tell Gradle that you’re using the Safe Args plug-in by
adding a line to the app build.gradle file. Open the file
SecretMessage/app/build.gradle, and add the line in bold to the plug-ins
section:
Once you’ve made these changes, click on the Sync Now option that
appears at the top of the code editor. This syncs the changes you’ve made
with the rest of your project.
NOTE
Make sure that you sync your changes each time you update the build.gradle files.
Now that the app includes Safe Args, we can use it to pass a message from
MessageFragment to EncryptFragment. We’ll do this next.
EncryptFragment needs to accept a String
argument
The first thing we need to do is specify that EncryptFragment can
accept the user’s message. We’ll do this by adding a String argument to
this fragment in the navigation graph; MessageFragment will then use
this argument to pass the user’s message (a String) to
EncryptFragment.
To add the argument, open the file nav_graph.xml from the
app/src/main/res/nav_graph.xml. Then select EncryptFragment in the
navigation graph design editor, go to the Attributes panel, and click on the
“+” button that appears next to the Arguments section:
When you click on the “+” button, an Add Argument window appears,
which you use to add details about the argument. Here, we want
EncryptFragment to accept a String argument for the user’s
message, so name the argument “message”, select “String” as its type, and
click on the Add button. This creates the new argument, and adds it to the
Arguments section of the Attributes panel:
The updated nav_graph.xml code
When you add an argument to a navigation graph, a new <argument>
element gets added to the underlying XML. Here’s the updated code for
nav_graph.xml (the new code is in bold):
MessageFragment needs to pass a message
to EncryptFragment
Now that we’ve added a String argument to EncryptFragment,
MessageFragment can use it to pass along the user’s message when it
navigates to this fragment.
As you already know, you navigate from one destination to another by
passing a navigation action to the navigation controller. The navigation
controller then uses this action to display the correct fragment.
MessageFragment, for example, uses the following code to navigate to
EncryptFragment when its button is clicked:
You can pass arguments to navigation actions
If you want to pass an argument to a destination, you do so by passing its
value to the navigation action.
When the navigation controller receives an action that includes an
argument, it navigates to the appropriate fragment, and passes along the
argument’s value. In the Secret Message app, for example, we can get
MessageFragment to pass the user’s message to EncryptMessage
(via the navigation controller) by including it in the navigation action. It
will work like this:
You can add arguments to navigation actions using a Directions class.
Let’s find out what this is.
Safe Args generates Directions classes
Directions classes are used to pass arguments to destinations. When
you enable the Safe Args plug-in, Android Studio uses it to generate a
Directions class for each fragment you can navigate from. In the
Secret Message app, for example, you can navigate from
WelcomeFragment and MessageFragment to other destinations, so
the Safe Args plug-in generates a Directions class for each of these
fragments; it generates a class named WeclomeFragmentDirections
for WelcomeFragment, and one named
MessageFragmentDirections gets generated for
MessageFragment:
Each fragment uses its own Directions class to navigate with.
MessageFragment, for example, needs to use the
MessageFragmentDirections class if it wants to navigate
elsewhere, and pass an argument.
Use a Directions class to add arguments to actions
Each Directions class includes a generated method for each of the
fragment’s actions. MessageFragment, for example, has an action with
the ID “action_messageFragment_to_encryptFragment”, so the
MessageFragmentDirections class includes a corresponding
method named actionMessageFragmentToEncryptFragment().
And because EncryptFragment accepts a String, the generated
method includes a String argument.
You use the generated methods to navigate to destinations. To navigate
from MessageFragment to EncryptFragment and pass it a String
message, for example, you’d add the following code to
MessageFragment:
Let’s add this code now.
Update the MessageFragment.kt code
Here’s the updated code for MessageFragment; make sure you add the
changes (in bold) to MessageFragment.kt:
That’s everything MessageFragment needs to pass the user’s message
to EncryptFragment. Next, we need to make EncryptFragment
pick it up and use it.
EncryptFragment needs to get the
argument’s value
As you know, MessageFragment uses a String argument to pass the
user’s message to EncryptFragment. EncryptFragment needs to
retrieve this value so that it can display an encrypted version of it.
Fragments can retrieve arguments using an Args class. When you enable
the Safe Args plug-in, Android Studio uses it to generate an Args class for
each fragment that accepts arguments. In the Secret Message app, for
example, EncryptFragment accepts a String argument, so the Safe
Args plug-in generates an Args class for it named
EncryptFragmentArgs:
The Safe Args plug-in generates Directions and Args classes. Use the
Directions class to pass arguments to a destination. Use the Args class
to retrieve them.
Use an Args class to retrieve arguments
Each Args class includes a fromBundle() method that you use to
retrieve any arguments that have been passed to the fragment. In the Secret
Message app, for example, EncryptFragment accepts a String
argument named message, so you can get the value of this argument
using:
This assigns a String object (the value of the argument) to message.
We need to encrypt the message
Now that we know how to make EncryptFragment retrieve the user’s
message, we can encrypt it and display the result.
We’ll encrypt the message using Kotlin’s reversed() method, which
simply reverses the order of a String’s letters. The code looks like this:
NOTE
In the real world, you’d want to use a much more advanced encryption technique. This
is just an example.
val encryptedView = view.findViewById<TextView>
(R.id.encrypted_message)
encryptedView.text = message.reversed()
We’ll show you the full EncryptFragment code on the next page.
The full code for EncryptFragment.kt
Here’s the complete code for EncryptFragment.kt; update its code so that it
includes the changes below:
That’s everything that we need to display the encrypted message. We’ll run
through what happens when the app runs on the next page.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: My project doesn’t recognize the Directions and Args
classes. Why is that?
A: It sounds like the Safe Args plug-in hasn’t generated them.
First, make sure you’ve added the Safe Args plug-in to the app’s
build.gradle file, and synced the changes. If it’s missing, Android
Studio won’t be able to generate the Directions and Args classes.
Next, make sure you’ve added an argument to EncryptFragment in
the navigation graph. Safe Args generates an Args class for every
destination that accepts arguments, so if it’s missing, the Args class
won’t get generated.
If you still get problems, try rebuilding your project by going to the
Build menu and choosing the Rebuild Project option.
Q: You said that Safe Args is added to the build.gradle files as a
plug-in, while the rest of the Navigation component is included as a
dependency. Why is this?
A: Safe Args is added as a plug-in because it needs to be able to
generate the Directions and Args classes. Plug-ins can generate
code, but dependencies can’t.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. The app is launched and MainActivity gets created.
WelcomeFragment is added to the navigation host and
displayed on the device screen.
2. When the user clicks on the Start button, its OnClickListener
code passes an action to the navigation controller’s navigate()
method.
The action describes a navigation path from WelcomeFragment
to MessageFragment.
3. The navigation controller puts MessageFragment in the
navigation host so that it’s displayed on the device screen.
4. The user enters a message and clicks the Next button.
5. The Next button’s OnClickListener uses the
MessageFragmentDirections class to attach the message to an
action.
The action (including the message) is passed to the navigation
controller.
6. The navigation controller passes the message to
EncryptFragment.
EncryptFragment uses the EncryptFragmentArgs class
to retrieve its value.
7. The navigation controller replaces MessageFragment with
EncryptFragment in MainActivity’s navigation host.
EncryptFragment is displayed on the device screen and shows
the encrypted message.
Test Drive
When we run the app, WelcomeFragment is displayed, and we can
navigate to MessageFragment by clicking on the Start button as before.
When we enter a message and click on MessageFragment’s Next
button, EncryptFragment is displayed. It shows the encrypted message.
The app works just the way we want.
There’s just one more change we want to make to it. Before we do so, have
a go at the following exercise.
Navigation Magnets
The navigation graph code below defines the navigation path between two
fragments: ChooseTypeFragment and DrinksFragment.
ChooseTypeFragment features a spinner with the ID choose, and a
button with the ID next. When the user clicks on the button,
ChooseTypeFragment needs to navigate to DrinksFragment,
passing it the user’s selected value from the spinner.
When DrinksFragment is displayed, it needs to display the selected
value in a text view in its layout that has the ID choice.
Someone tried to write the code for ChooseTypeFragment and
DrinksFragment using fridge magnets, but some of them fell off when
we shut the fridge door too quickly. Can you piece the code back together
again?
Navigation graph:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<navigation
xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 xmlns:app="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res-auto"
 xmlns:tools="http://schemas.android.com/tools"
 android:id="@+id/nav_graph"
 app:startDestination="@id/chooseTypeFragment">
 <fragment
 android:id="@+id/chooseTypeFragment"
 android:name="com.hfad.drinksapp.ChooseTypeFragment"
 android:label="fragment_choose_type"
 tools:layout="@layout/fragment_choose_type" >
 <action

android:id="@+id/action_chooseTypeFragment_to_drinksFragment"
 app:destination="@id/drinksFragment" />
 </fragment>
 <fragment
 android:id="@+id/drinksFragment"
 android:name="com.hfad.drinksapp.DrinksFragment"
 android:label="fragment_drinks"
 tools:layout="@layout/fragment_drinks" >
 <argument
 android:name="drinkType"
 app:argType="string" />
 </fragment>
</navigation>
ChooseTypeFragment:
class ChooseTypeFragment : Fragment() {
 override fun onCreateView(inflater: LayoutInflater,
container: ViewGroup?,
 savedInstanceState: Bundle?): View?
{
 val view =
inflater.inflate(R.layout.fragment_choose_type, container, false)
 val choice = view.findViewById<Spinner>
(R.id.choose).selectedItem.toString()
 val nextButton = view.findViewById<Button>(R.id.next)
 nextButton.setOnClickListener {
 val action =
.....................................................

.....................................................(choice)
 view.findNavController().navigate(action)
 }
 return view
 }
}
DrinksFragment:
class DrinksFragment : Fragment() {
 override fun onCreateView(inflater: LayoutInflater,
container: ViewGroup?,
 savedInstanceState: Bundle?): View?
{
 val view = inflater.inflate(R.layout.fragment_drinks,
container, false)
 val choice =
.................................................................
..
 val choiceView = view.findViewById<TextView>(R.id.choice)
 choiceView.text = choice
 return view
 }
}
Navigation Magnets Solution
The navigation graph code below defines the navigation path between two
fragments: ChooseTypeFragment and DrinksFragment.
ChooseTypeFragment features a spinner with the ID choose, and a
button with the ID next. When the user clicks on the button,
ChooseTypeFragment needs to navigate to DrinksFragment,
passing it the user’s selected value from the spinner.
When DrinksFragment is displayed, it needs to display the selected
value in a text view in its layout that has the ID choice.
Someone tried to write the code for ChooseTypeFragment and
DrinksFragment using fridge magnets, but some of them fell off when
we shut the fridge door too quickly. Can you piece the code back together
again?
Navigation graph:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<navigation
xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 xmlns:app="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res-auto"
 xmlns:tools="http://schemas.android.com/tools"
 android:id="@+id/nav_graph"
 app:startDestination="@id/chooseTypeFragment">
 <fragment
 android:id="@+id/chooseTypeFragment"
 android:name="com.hfad.drinksapp.ChooseTypeFragment"
 android:label="fragment_choose_type"
 tools:layout="@layout/fragment_choose_type" >
 <action

android:id="@+id/action_chooseTypeFragment_to_drinksFragment"
 app:destination="@id/drinksFragment" />
 </fragment>
 <fragment
 android:id="@+id/drinksFragment"
 android:name="com.hfad.drinksapp.DrinksFragment"
 android:label="fragment_drinks"
 tools:layout="@layout/fragment_drinks" >
 <argument
 android:name="drinkType"
 app:argType="string" />
 </fragment>
</navigation>
ChooseTypeFragment:
DrinksFragment:
What if the user wants to go back?
There’s just one more thing we need to consider in the Secret Message app:
what happens when the user tries to go back through the app’s screens.
As we’re sure you know, you go back in Androidville using the device back
button or with a back gesture, and this takes you back through any screens
that have been displayed.
As an example, suppose the user launches the Secret Message app and
navigates from WelcomeFragment to MessageFragment and then to
EncryptFragment like this:
If she clicks on the back button while EncryptFragment is displayed,
the app goes back to the previous fragment—MessageFragment—like
so:
But what if you want pressing the back button to take the user back to an
earlier fragment?
We could change the back behavior
Instead of going back to MessageFragment when the user clicks on the
back button, it might be better to go straight back to WelcomeFragment.
This would let the user start again from the beginning of the app like this:
To find out how to control this kind of behavior, let’s go behind the scenes
and take a look at how Android’s back stack works.
Welcome to the back stack
When you go from destination to destination in your app, Android keeps
track of each place you’ve visited by adding it to the back stack. The back
stack is a log of all the places you’ve visited in the app. Each time you
navigate to a destination, Android adds it to the top of the back stack, and
when you press the back button, it pops the most recent destination off the
stack, and displays the one underneath.
A back stack scenario
1. When you start the Secret Message app, WelcomeFragment is
displayed.
Android adds WelcomeFragment to the back stack.
2. You navigate to MessageFragment.
This destination is added to the top of the back stack, above
WelcomeFragment.
3. You then navigate to EncryptFragment.
EncryptFragment is added to the top of the back stack.
4. You click on the Back button, and EncryptFragment pops off
the back stack.
MessageFragment is displayed, as this is now at the top of the
back stack.
5. You click on the Back button again.
MessageFragment pops off the top of the back stack, and
WelcomeFragment is displayed.
Use the navigation graph to pop fragments
off the back stack
You’ve just seen how the back stack and back button operate by default, but
if you want, you can pop destinations off the back stack as the user
navigates through the app. You do this by specifying pop behavior in the
navigation graph.
To see how this works, let’s update the navigation graph in the Secret
Message app so that when the app navigates from MessageFragment to
EncryptFragment, MessageFragment is popped off the back stack.
This means that when the user clicks on the back button while
EncryptFragment is displayed, WelcomeFragment is displayed
instead of MessageFragment.
Open the navigation graph nav_graph.xml (if it’s not already open), and
switch to the design editor. Select the action that connects
MessageFragment to EncryptFragment. Then, in the Pop Behavior
section of the Attributes panel, change the value of the popUpTo property
to “welcomeFragment”. This tells Android to pop fragments off the back
stack until it reaches WelcomeFragment:
Before we take the app for a test drive, let’s see what the underlying XML
looks like.
The updated nav_graph.xml code
When you add pop behavior to an action, a <popUpTo> element is added
to the underlying XML. This specifies how far back fragments should be
popped off the back stack to.
Here’s the updated code for nav_graph.xml:
Test Drive
When we run the app, WelcomeFragment is displayed. We can navigate
to MessageFragment and EncryptFragment as before:
When we click on the back button, the app goes back to
WelcomeFragment, and bypasses MessageFragment:
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to build a multi-screen app that
passes data between fragments, and interacts with the back stack. These are
core skills for building modern Android apps.
You’ll discover more ways in which you can use the Navigation component
in the next chapter.
BE the Safe Args Plug-in
The code below shows the navigation graph for a Starbuzz app. Your
job is to play like you’re the Safe Args plug-in, and say which
Directions and Args classes will get generated from this code.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<navigation
xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 xmlns:app="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res-auto"
 xmlns:tools="http://schemas.android.com/tools"
 android:id="@+id/nav_graph"
 app:startDestination="@id/selectCoffeeFragment">
 <fragment
 android:id="@+id/selectCoffeeFragment"
 android:name="com.hfad.starbuzz.SelectCoffeeFragment"
 android:label="fragment_select_coffee"
 tools:layout="@layout/fragment_select_coffee" >
 <action

android:id="@+id/action_selectCoffeeFragment_to_coffeeFragment"
 app:destination="@id/coffeeFragment" />
 </fragment>
 <fragment
 android:id="@+id/coffeeFragment"
 android:name="com.hfad.starbuzz.CoffeeFragment"
 android:label="fragment_coffee"
 tools:layout="@layout/fragment_coffee" >
 <argument
 android:name="coffee"
 app:argType="string" />
 </fragment>
</navigation>
Answers in “BE the Safe Args Plug-in Solution”.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL
The navigation graph below lets the user navigate from
TitleFragment to ChooseTypeFragment, and from
ChooseTypeFragment to DrinksFragment.
How would you update the code so that when DrinksFragment is
displayed and the user presses the back button, the app goes straight
back to TitleFragment?
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<navigation
xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 xmlns:app="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res-auto"
 xmlns:tools="http://schemas.android.com/tools"
 android:id="@+id/nav_graph"
 app:startDestination="@id/titleFragment">
 <fragment
 android:id="@+id/titleFragment"
 android:name="com.hfad.drinksapp.TitleFragment"
 android:label="fragment_title"
 tools:layout="@layout/fragment_title" >
 <action

android:id="@+id/action_titleFragment_to_chooseTypeFragment"
 app:destination="@id/chooseTypeFragment" />
 </fragment>
 <fragment
 android:id="@+id/chooseTypeFragment"
 android:name="com.hfad.drinksapp.ChooseTypeFragment"
 android:label="fragment_choose_type"
 tools:layout="@layout/fragment_choose_type" >
 <action

android:id="@+id/action_chooseTypeFragment_to_drinksFragment"
 app:destination="@id/drinksFragment" />
 </fragment>
 <fragment
 android:id="@+id/drinksFragment"
 android:name="com.hfad.drinksapp.DrinksFragment"
 android:label="fragment_drinks"
 tools:layout="@layout/fragment_drinks" />
</navigation>
Answers in “ Sharpen your pencil
Solution”.
BE the Safe Args Plug-in Solution
The code below shows the navigation graph for a Starbuzz app. Your
job is to play like you’re the Safe Args plug-in, and say which
Directions and Args classes will get generated from this code.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL SOLUTION
The navigation graph below lets the user navigate from
TitleFragment to ChooseTypeFragment, and from
ChooseTypeFragment to DrinksFragment.
How would you update the code so that when DrinksFragment is
displayed and the user presses the back button, the app goes straight
back to TitleFragment?
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 7 under your belt and now you’ve added the Safe
Args plug-in and back stack manipulation to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
Safe Args is an extra part of the Navigation component that’s
used to pass arguments in a type-safe way. It generates
Directions and Args classes.
Directions classes are used to pass arguments to
destinations.
Safe Args generates a Directions class for every
destination you can navigate from.
Args classes are used to retrieve arguments that have been
passed to destinations.
Safe Args generates an Args class for every destination that
accepts arguments.
Use pop behavior in the navigation graph to pop destinations
off the back stack.
Chapter 8. Navigation ui: Going
Places
Most apps need to be able to navigate between destinations.
And with Android’s Navigation component, building this UI became much
simpler. Here, you’ll learn how to use some of Android’s navigation UI
components so that your users can navigate your app more easily. You’ll
see how to use themes, and replace your app’s default app bar with a
toolbar, You’ll learn how to add menu items you can use for navigation.
You’ll discover how to implement bottom bar navigation. Finally, you’ll
create a swish navigation drawer: a panel that slides out from the side of
your activity.
Different apps, different structures
In the previous two chapters, you learned how to use Android’s Navigation
component to navigate from fragment to fragment by clicking on a button.
This approach worked well in the Secret Message app because we needed
to navigate from one destination to another in a linear way:
But not all apps follow this kind of structure. Many apps have screens you
need to be able to navigate to from wherever you are in the app. An email
app, for example, may have inbox, sent items, and help screens that must be
available throughout the app:
When you have an app with a looser navigation structure like this, how do
you make sure you can always navigate to each screen?
Android includes navigation UI components
When you have screens you want to be able to access from anywhere in
your app, you might want to use one of Android’s navigation UI
components. They include:
An app bar
This is a bar that appears at the top of the screen, and Android Studio
usually includes one for you by default. You can add items to the app bar
which, when clicked, navigate to destinations.
The bottom navigation bar
This appears at the bottom of the screen. It features a small number of items
you can use for navigation.
A navigation drawer
This is a drawer that slides out from the edge of the screen. Many apps
include one of these as it can be very flexible.
In this chapter, we’re going to discover how to implement each of these
three types of navigation UI by building a prototype email app named
CatChat.
BRAIN POWER
Think about where you may have seen each of these navigation UI
components in existing Android apps. What situations do you think
each one is best for? Why?
How the CatChat app will work
The CatChat app will feature a single activity named MainActivity, and
three fragments: InboxFragment, SentItemsFragment, and
HelpFragment. Each fragment will be displayed in MainActivity as
the user navigates to each one.
The app will include an app bar that includes a Help menu item. When the
user clicks on this, the app will navigate to HelpFragment by displaying
it in MainActivity.
The app will also feature a navigation drawer that will be used to navigate
between all three fragments. The drawer will include an item for each
fragment, and clicking on each one will display the correct fragment:
Let’s go through the steps we’ll take to create the CatChat app.
Here’s what we’re going to do
There are four main steps we’ll go through to create the CatChat app:
1. Replace the default app bar with a toolbar.
A toolbar looks like an app’s default app bar, but it provides you
with more flexibility, and includes the latest app bar features.
Along the way, you’ll learn how to apply themes and styles.
2. Add a Help menu item to the toolbar.
When clicked, the Help menu item will navigate to
HelpFragment.
3. Implement the bottom bar navigation.
We’ll add a bottom bar to the app so that we can navigate between
each of the app’s fragments.
4. Create the navigation drawer.
Finally, we’ll replace the bottom navigation bar with a navigation
drawer. The drawer will include a header image, and items for each
of the app’s fragments, grouped into sections.
We’ll start by creating a new project for the CatChat app.
Create a new project
We’re going to use a new project for the CatChat app, so create a new
Android Studio project using the same steps you used in the previous
chapters. Choose the Empty Activity option, enter a name of “CatChat” and
a package name of “com.hfad.catchat”, and accept the default save location.
Make sure the language is set to Kotlin and the minimum SDK is API 21 so
that it will run on most Android devices.
A default app bar gets added…
When you create a new project with an empty activity, Android Studio
usually includes an app bar that displays the app’s name. You can see this
app bar at the top of the screen when you run the app:
Having an app bar is useful for a number of reasons:
It makes key actions more prominent in a way that’s
predictable, such as sharing content or performing searches.
It can help the user know where they are in the app by
displaying the app name, or a label for the current screen.
You can use it to navigate to different destinations.
But how does the app bar get added?
…by applying a theme
The default app bar gets added to the app by applying a theme. A theme
gives your app a consistent look and feel across multiple screens. It controls
the app’s general appearance, and whether it includes an app bar.
Android comes with a number of themes you can use in your apps, and by
default, Android Studio applies one that includes an app bar.
The CatChat app will use a Material theme
We’re going to apply a theme to the CatChat app that uses Material
Design.
Material is a design system developed by Google that helps you build highquality apps and websites with a consistent look and feel. The idea behind it
is that a user can switch from a Google app like the Play Store to an app
designed by a third-party developer and instantly feel comfortable and
know what to do.
Material was originally inspired by print-based design principles and
movement to reflect how real-world objects (such as index cards and pieces
of paper) look and behave. Its latest evolution is known as Material You,
which gives users a more fluid experience with a personalized color palette.
SERIOUS CODING
Material Design includes a whole host of components, themes, tools,
and guidelines. You’ll put some of these into practice over the next
couple chapters, and you can learn more here:
https://material.io
The app build.gradle file needs a Material library
dependency
The Material themes are held in a separate library that you need to include
in your app. You do this by adding a dependency to the
com.google.android.material library in the app’s build.gradle file.
As we want to use a Material theme in the CatChat app, we need to make
sure it includes this library. Open the file CatChat/app/build.gradle, and
make sure it includes the following line (in bold):
Android Studio may have already added this dependency to the file for you.
If not, you’ll need to add it yourself, and click on the Sync Now option that
appears at the top of the code editor to sync the change with the rest of your
project.
We want to apply a Material theme to the CatChat app to control its app bar.
Let’s find out how to do this.
Apply a theme in AndroidManifest.xml
You apply a theme in the app’s AndroidManifest.xml file. As you learned in
Chapter 3, this file provides information about the app’s configuration. It
features attributes—including the theme—that have a direct impact on the
app bar.
Here’s the AndroidManifest.xml code Android Studio created for us in the
CatChat project (we’ve bolded the key areas):
The android:label attribute refers to the text that’s displayed in the
app bar, and it’s the name you specify when you first create the app. In the
code above, it uses a String resource named app_name, which Android
Studio has added to strings.xml.
The android:theme attribute specifies the theme. In the code above, it’s
set using:
android:theme="@style/Theme.CatChat">
This specifies that the theme is defined as a style resource (denoted by
@style) named Theme.CatChat.
Define styles in style resource files
Style resources are used to describe any themes and styles the app needs to
use, and they’re held in one or more style resources files.
When we created the CatChat app, Android Studio created two style
resource files for us. Both files are named themes.xml, and they’re located
in the app/src/main/res/values and app/src/main/res/values-night folders.
The one in the values folder is the app’s default style resource file, while the
one in the values-night folder is used at night.
NOTE
Some versions of Android Studio name this file styles.xml instead.
themes.xml in the values folder defines a style code like this:
The <style> element tells Android that it’s a style resource.
Every style must have a name to identify it by, and you define this using the
name attribute like so:
AndroidManifest.xml’s theme attribute uses this name to set the app’s
theme, for example "@style/Theme.CatChat".
The style also includes a parent attribute, which specifies which
underlying theme the style should be based on. The above code uses:
which is a theme with a dark app bar that lets the app transition between
day and night themes. During the day, it uses the style defined in the values
folder’s style resource file, and it switches to the one in the values-night
folder at night:
The above style also includes <item> elements, which override some of
the theme’s colors. Let’s look at this in more detail.
Styles can override theme colors
If you want to override any properties in the parent theme, such as its color
scheme, you can do so by adding <item> elements to the style. The
CatChat app, for example, includes items that override the primary and
secondary brand colors. The primary color is the app’s main color, and it’s
used for things like the app bar. The secondary color provides a contrast,
and it’s used by some views.
You can use multiple style resource files to apply a different color scheme
in different situations. The CatChat app, for example, includes one style
resource file in the values folder, and another in values-night. This
arrangement—along with the DayNight theme each style is based on—
lets you apply different color schemes during the day and at night.
Here’s the code the CatChat app uses to override the primary colors in its
themes.xml file in the values folder:
<item name="colorPrimary">@color/purple_500</item>
<item name="colorPrimaryVariant">@color/purple_700</item>
<item name="colorOnPrimary">@color/white</item>
As you can see, each item has a name, and uses @color to refer to a color
in a color resource file.
SERIOUS CODING
You can find out more about how colors are used here:
https://material.io/develop/android/theming/color
There’s also a color tool to help you choose your app’s color scheme:
https://material.io/tools/color
Color resource files define a set of colors
When you create a new project, Android Studio usually includes a default
color resource file named colors.xml. It’s located in the
app/src/main/res/values folder, and its colors can be used throughout your
app.
A typical color resource file looks like this:
To change your app’s color scheme, simply add the colors you want to the
color resource file, and refer to them in its style resource files.
Replace the default app bar with a toolbar
So far, you’ve seen how Android Studio adds a default app bar to your app
by applying a theme. Adding an app bar in this way is easy, but a more
flexible approach is to replace it with a toolbar.
A basic toolbar looks just like the default app bar you’ve already seen, but
it’s much more flexible. You can change its height, for example, and in the
next chapter, you’ll learn how to make one expand or collapse when the
user scrolls the device screen. It also includes all the latest app bar features,
so applying a toolbar makes it easier to include these in your app.
You replace the default app bar by removing the original app bar, including
a toolbar in your layout, and then telling the activity to use the toolbar as its
app bar. We’ll show you how to do this over the next few pages.
Remove the default app bar using a theme
You remove the default app bar by applying a theme to the app that doesn’t
include an app bar.
The current version of the CatChat app, for example, uses the theme
Theme.MaterialComponents.DayNight.DarkActionBar.
We’re going to remove the default app bar by replacing it with
Theme.MaterialComponents.DayNight.NoActionBar. These
two themes have the same general appearance, except that the second has
no app bar.
Change the theme now by updating the code in the themes.xml files in the
values and values-night folders so that they include the change shown
below (in bold):
That’s everything that we need to do to remove the default app bar. Next up,
how to add the toolbar.
A toolbar is a type of View
Unlike the default app bar, a toolbar is a type of view that you add to your
layout. As it’s a view, this means you have full control over its size and
position.
Different types of toolbars are available, and in the CatChat app we’re
going to use a Material toolbar. This is a type of toolbar that works well
with Material themes, such as the one we’re using in this app.
You add a Material toolbar using code like this:
You start by defining the toolbar using:
where
com.google.android.material.appbar.MaterialToolbar
is the fully qualified path of the MaterialToolbar class. You then use
other view attributes to give it an ID, and specify its appearance. To make
the toolbar as wide as its parent and as tall as the default app bar from the
underlying theme, for example, you use:
android:layout_width="match_parent"
android:layout_height="?attr/actionBarSize"
The ?attr prefix in the above code means that you want to use an
attribute from the current theme. In this particular case, we’re using ?
attr/actionBarSize to refer to the height of the theme’s default app
bar.
You can also style the toolbar so that it uses the app’s primary colors. This
is done using the line:
Now that you’ve learned what toolbar code looks like, let’s add one to
MainActivity’s layout.
Add the toolbar to activity_main.xml
We’re going to add a toolbar to MainActivity’s layout so it appears at
the top of the screen. Update the code in activity_main.xml so that it
matches the code below:
Where did the app name go?
The above code adds a toolbar to MainActivity’s layout, but it doesn’t
yet include any app bar functionality. If you were to run the app at this
point, you’d find, for example, that the app name isn’t displayed in the
toolbar as it was in the default app bar we had previously:
To get the toolbar to behave like a proper app bar, we need to make some
changes to the activity’s Kotlin code.
Set the toolbar as MainActivity’s app bar
To make the toolbar behave like a proper app bar, you need to tell
MainActivity to treat it as one. You do this by calling the
setSupportActionBar() method in the activity’s Kotlin code, and
passing it a reference to the toolbar like so:
We’ll add this code to MainActivity’s onCreate() method so that it
runs immediately after the activity gets created. Update the code for
MainActivity.kt so that it includes the changes (in bold) shown below:
That’s everything we need to replace the app’s default app bar with a
toolbar. Let’s take the app for a test drive and make sure it appears correctly.
Test Drive
When we run the app, MainActivity displays a toolbar at the top of the
screen. The toolbar includes the name of the app.
Now that we’ve replaced the default app bar with a toolbar, let’s add some
more functionality to it.
Let’s use the toolbar to navigate
At the beginning of the chapter, we said we wanted to be able to navigate to
different screens in the CatChat app using Android’s navigation UI
components. Now that we’ve added a toolbar to the app, let’s create a
couple of screens, and use the toolbar to navigate between them.
How toolbar navigation will work
We’ll begin by creating two new fragments—InboxFragment and
HelpFragment—which will be displayed in MainActivity when the
user navigates to each one. InboxFragment will be displayed when the
app is launched, and HelpFragment will be displayed when we navigate
to it.
NOTE
We’re not going to add any email or help functionality to InboxFragment and
HelpFragment. We’ll just display a piece of text in each one so we know which
fragment is being displayed.
We’ll navigate to HelpFragment by adding a Help item to the toolbar so
it looks like this:
We’ll add the Help item using a menu; you’ll find out how to do this a few
pages ahead.
When we click on the Help item, the app will navigate to HelpFragment.
We’ll also update the toolbar’s title to indicate what the current screen is,
and provide an Up button to make it easy to navigate back to
InboxFragment.
So that’s how the toolbar navigation will work. Let’s start implementing it
by adding InboxFragment and HelpFragment to the app.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Why is the method you use to set an app bar called
setSupportActionBar()? Shouldn’t it be
setSupportAppBar()?
A: In early versions of Android, the app bar was called an action bar,
and behind the scenes, the default app bar uses a class named
ActionBar. This is why the method is called
setSupportActionBar.
Q: Can styles only be used to override the default colors?
A: No, you can use them to override any of the theme’s properties. To
stop the text on all buttons from being displayed as uppercase, for
example, you can add an item with the name
"android:textAllCaps", which has the value false.
Create InboxFragment
We want to display InboxFragment in MainActivity when the app
launches. Highlight the com.hfad.catchat package in the app/src/main/java
folder, then go to File→New→Fragment→Fragment (Blank). Name the
fragment “InboxFragment”, name its layout “fragment_inbox”, and make
sure the language is set to Kotlin. Then update the code for
InboxFragment.kt to match the code below:
And here’s the code for fragment_inbox.xml (update the code for this file
too):
Create HelpFragment
We’ll display HelpFragment in MainActivity when the user clicks
on the Help item in the toolbar. Highlight the com.hfad.catchat package in
the app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Fragment→Fragment
(Blank). Name the fragment “HelpFragment”, name its layout
“fragment_help”, and make sure the language is set to Kotlin. Then make
sure the code for HelpFragment.kt matches the code below:
Then make sure the code for fragment_help.xml matches the layout below:
We’ll use the Navigation component to
navigate to HelpFragment
In Chapter 6, you learned how to navigate between fragments using
Android’s Navigation component. Even though we’re now going to use the
toolbar to navigate to a new destination, we can still use the Navigation
component for all our navigation needs.
We first need to add the Navigation component to the CatChat project using
Gradle.
Add a version number to the project build.gradle file
Just as before, you need to add a new variable to the project’s build.gradle
file that specifies the version of the Navigation component that should be
added to the app.
Open the file CatChat/build.gradle, and add the following line (in bold) to
the buildscript section:
Add dependencies to the app build.gradle file
Next, you need to add two Navigation component dependencies to the app’s
version of the build.gradle file.
Open the file CatChat/app/build.gradle, and add the following two lines (in
bold) to the dependencies section:
Once you’ve made these changes, click on the Sync Now option that
appears at the top of the code editor to sync the changes with the rest of
your project.
Now that you’ve added the Navigation component to your project, let’s use
it to create a navigation graph after the following exercise.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Do I have to add the Navigation component to each app that
includes navigation? Isn’t there a shortcut?
A: The Navigation component isn’t included in the main Android
libraries, so you need to add it to your project before you can use it.
Some versions of Android Studio automatically add Navigation
component dependencies when you create a navigation graph, but they
might use a different version. We’re getting you to add them manually
so that you know it’s there, and what version it is.
WHAT’S MY PURPOSE?
We’re going to use the Navigation component to navigate between
fragments in the CatChat app, but can you can remember what each part
of the Navigation component does?
Draw a line from each part to its purpose. Hint: some things might have
more than one purpose.
Component part Purpose
A place you can navigate to, usually a fragment.
NavHostFragment
Holds navigation information such as destinations.
Navigation graph
An empty container used to display destinations.
Destination
Describes the possible navigation paths through an app.
Navigation host
Controls which destination is displayed.
Navigation controller
A default implementation of a navigation host.
WHAT’S MY PURPOSE SOLUTION?
We’re going to use the Navigation component to navigate between
fragments in the CatChat app, but can you can remember what each part
of the Navigation component does?
Draw a line from each part to its purpose. Hint: some things might have
more than one purpose.
Add the fragments to a navigation graph
As you already know, your app’s navigation graph holds details of the
destinations in your app and the possible paths you can take to navigate to
them. As InboxFragment and HelpFragment are possible
destinations in the CatChat app, we’ll create a new navigation graph, and
add the two fragments to it.
To create the navigation graph, select the CatChat/app/src/main/res folder
in the project explorer, and then choose File→New→Android Resource
File. When prompted, enter a file name of “nav_graph”, choose a resource
type of “Navigation”, and click on the OK button.
Next, open the navigation graph (file nav_graph.xml), switch to the Code
view, and update the file so that it matches the code below:
The above code adds InboxFragment and HelpFragment to the
navigation graph, and assigns a user-friendly label to each one.
Those are all the changes we need to make to the navigation graph. Next,
let’s update MainActivity’s layout so that it can display each fragment
when we navigate to it.
Add a navigation host to activity_main.xml
As you learned in Chapter 6, you display each destination you navigate to
by adding a navigation host to the activity’s layout. You do this using a
FragmentContainerView, specifying the type of navigation host you
want to use, and the name of the navigation graph.
The code to do this in the CatChat app is almost the same as the code that
we added to the Secret Message app in Chapter 6. Update your code for
activity_main.xml to include the changes below (in bold):
Now that we’ve added the navigation host, let’s add an item to the toolbar,
which we can use to navigate to HelpFragment.
Specify items in the toolbar with a menu
resource file
You tell Android which items should appear on the toolbar by defining a
menu. Each menu is defined in an XML menu resource file which specifies
the items that you want to appear.
We’re going to create a new menu resource file named menu_toolbar.xml
which we’ll use to add the Help item to the toolbar. Select the
app/src/main/res folder, go to the File menu, choose New, and then select
the option to create a new Android resource file. When prompted, give it a
name of “menu_toolbar”, specify a resource type of “Menu”, and make sure
that the directory name is menu. When you click on the OK button, Android
Studio will create the file for you, and add it to the app/src/main/res/menu
folder.
Just like navigation graphs and layout files, you can edit menu resource
files by updating the XML code, or by using the built-in design editor.
Here’s what the design editor looks like:
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Is it just toolbars that use menu resource files?
A: As you’ll find out later in the chapter, menu resource files are also
used for bottom navigation bars and navigation drawers. You can create
pop-up and context menus with them too. Find out more here:
https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/menus
Let’s add a Help item to the menu
We want to be able to navigate to HelpFragment from the toolbar, so
we’ll add a Help item to the menu resource file. We’ll do this by directly
editing the XML code.
Switch to the Code view of menu_toolbar.xml, then update the code so it
matches the code below (the lines you need to add are in bold):
Every menu resource file, including the one above, has a <menu> root
element. This is what tells Android that it defines a menu.
Inside the <menu> element, you typically have a number of <item>
elements, each one describing a separate item. In this particular case, there’s
a single Help item with the title “Help”.
The <item> element has a number of attributes that you can use to control
the item’s appearance.
The android:id attribute assigns an ID to the item. This ID is used by
the Navigation component to navigate to a destination, and it must have
the same ID as the destination you want to navigate to in the navigation
graph. You’ll find out how this works a few pages ahead.
The android:icon attribute specifies which icon (if any) should be
displayed for the item. Android has many built-in icons, and the IDE
presents you with a list of available ones when you start typing the icon
name.
The android:title attribute defines the item’s text.
The app:showAsAction attribute specifies how you want the item to
appear in the toolbar. Setting it to “always” means that it should always
appear in the main area of the toolbar.
WATCH IT!
The menu item’s ID must match the destination ID in the
navigation graph.
Navigation UI components—such as the toolbar—rely on these IDs
being the same. If they’re different, your toolbar navigation won’t work
properly.
onCreateOptionsMenu() adds menu items to
the toolbar
Once you’ve defined the menu resource file, you add its items to the toolbar
by implementing the onCreateOptionsMenu() method in your
activity code. This method gets called when the activity is ready to add
items to the toolbar. It inflates the menu resource file, and adds each item it
describes to the toolbar.
In the CatChat app, we want to add the item defined in menu_toolbar.xml to
MainActivity’s toolbar. The code to add this item is shown below in
bold (you’ll update your code a few pages ahead):
The line:
menuInflater.inflate(R.menu.menu_toolbar, menu)
inflates the menu resource file. Behind the scenes, it creates a Menu object
that represents the menu resource file, and any items the menu resource file
contains are translated to MenuItem objects. These are then added to the
toolbar.
That’s everything that’s needed to add a menu to the toolbar. Next, we’ll
make MainActivity navigate to HelpFragment when the user clicks
the Help item.
Respond to menu item clicks with
onOptionsItemSelected()
Once you’ve used the onCreateOptionsMenu() method to add menu
items to the toolbar, you make them respond to clicks by implementing
onOptionsItemSelected(). This method runs whenever an item in
the toolbar is clicked:
In the CatChat app, we want to navigate to HelpFragment when the user
clicks the Help menu item, and we can achieve this with a little help from
the Navigation component.
Here’s what the code looks like; we’ll add these changes to MainActivity.kt
a few pages ahead:
Each time the Help menu item is clicked, the navigation controller gets its
ID and looks for a matching one in the navigation graph. It then passes the
destination with this ID to the navigation host so that it’s displayed on the
device screen.
We need to configure the toolbar
We’ve now covered everything that’s needed to add the Help menu item to
the toolbar and make it navigate to HelpFragment. Before we take the
app for a test drive, however, there’s one more change we’re going to make.
When we defined the navigation graph nav_graph.xml earlier in the chapter,
we added labels to each destination using code like this:
To make it clear which screen is being displayed, we’re going to configure
the toolbar so that each time we navigate to a new destination, its label is
displayed in the toolbar. We’ll also add an Up button to the toolbar so that
when the user navigates to HelpFragment, it provides an easy way of
navigating back to InboxFragment:
Up navigation may sound the same as using the device Back button, but it’s
slightly different. The Back button allows users to work their way back
through the back stack: the history of screens they’ve visited. The Up
button, on the other hand, is based on the navigation graph hierarchy. It
provides a quick way of going up this hierarchy.
We can configure the toolbar to update the text and include an Up button
using the Navigation component. Let’s find out how.
Configure the toolbar using an
AppBarConfiguration
We want to configure the toolbar so that the text it displays corresponds to
the label of the current destination in the navigation graph, and so that it
includes an Up button. We can do this by building an
AppBarConfiguration object that’s based on the navigation graph,
and linking it to the toolbar. The AppBarConfiguration class is part
of the Navigation component, and it’s used to make app bars and toolbars
play nicely with the navigation controller.
Here’s the code to build an AppBarConfiguration and link it to a
toolbar (in bold):
The above code first gets a reference to the navigation controller from the
navigation host using the code:
Code like this is necessary whenever you need to get a reference to the
navigation controller from an activity’s onCreate() method.
The code then builds a configuration that links the toolbar to the navigation
graph, and applies it to the toolbar.
When the code runs, it uses information in the navigation graph to display
the current destination’s label. It also adds an Up button to the toolbar for
all destinations except the navigation graph’s Start destination, which in this
case is InboxFragment.
That’s everything that you need to know to implement toolbar navigation.
We’ll show you the full MainActivity code on the next page.
The full code for MainActivity.kt
Here’s the complete code for MainActivity.kt; update your code to include
the changes below (in bold):
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. The app is launched and MainActivity gets created.
InboxFragment is added to the navigation host and displayed
on the device screen.
2. MainActivity’s onCreateOptionsMenu method runs.
It adds the Help menu item defined in menu_toolbar.xml to the
toolbar.
3. The user clicks the Help item in the toolbar.
4. MainActivity’s onOptionsItemSelected() method runs.
It passes navigation for the Help item to the navigation controller.
5. The navigation controller looks for the Help item’s ID in the
navigation graph.
6. The navigation controller replaces InboxFragment with
HelpFragment in the navigation host.
Test Drive
When we run the CatChat app, MainActivity is launched, and
InboxFragment is displayed in MainActivity’s layout.
A Help item is displayed in MainActivity’s toolbar. When we click on
it, the app navigates to HelpFragment. The toolbar text is changed to
“Help” and an Up button appears.
When we click on the Up button, the app navigates to InboxFragment.
The Up button disappears and the text “Inbox” is displayed in the toolbar.
Well done! You’ve now learned how to add a toolbar and use it for
navigation.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Could we have added menu items and added an Up button using
the default app bar?
A: Yes, but it would have required more Kotlin code to do so. To
implement the Up button, for example, you’d need to override a
separate method named onSupportNavigateUp().
Q: When does the Up button appear?
A: When any fragment is displayed in the navigation host that’s not the
start destination in the navigation graph. In this example, it appears for
any fragment except InboxFragment.
Q: Can you add a toolbar to a fragment?
A: Yes. A toolbar is a type of View, so you can add it to activities or
fragments.
Q: How do I know whether to add it to an activity or a fragment?
A: If you want the toolbar’s layout to be the same for all fragments, add
it to the activity that displays these fragments. If you want the toolbar’s
layout to be significantly different, consider adding it to the fragment
instead.
BE the Menu
A menu resource file and navigation graph is shown below. The menu
is added to a toolbar. Your job is to play like you’re the menu, and say
which fragment is navigated to when each item in the menu is clicked.
BE the Menu Solution
A menu resource file and navigation graph is shown below. The menu
is added to a toolbar. Your job is to play like you’re the menu, and say
which fragment is navigated to when each item in the menu is clicked.
Most types of UI navigation work with the
Navigation component
In the chapter so far, you’ve learned how to enable toolbar navigation by
defining a menu resource file, using the Navigation component to navigate
between fragments, and configuring the toolbar to change its appearance as
you navigate through the app.
The great news is that other types of UI navigation—such as bottom
navigation bars and navigation drawers—work in a similar way. Even
though they look different from one another, you can take the techniques
you’ve learned for toolbar navigation and apply them to other types of
navigation.
To see how this works, we’re going to add a bottom navigation bar to the
CatChat app’s MainActivity.
A bottom navigation bar can hold up to five items. It’s displayed at the
bottom of the screen.
How the bottom navigation bar will work
As its name suggests, a bottom navigation bar is a type of navigation bar
that’s positioned at the bottom of the device screen. You can use it to
navigate to up to five destinations.
The CatChat app’s bottom navigation bar will look like this:
As you can see, the bar contains three items: Inbox, Sent Items, and Help.
When we click on each item, the app will navigate to the fragment
associated with it. When we click on the Help item, for example, the app
will navigate to HelpFragment, and when we click on Sent Items, it will
navigate to a new fragment (which we need to create) named
SentItemsFragment.
We’ll implement bottom bar navigation over the next few pages, and we’ll
start by creating the new fragment: SentItemsFragment.
Create SentItemsFragment
We need to create a new fragment named SentItemsFragment.
Highlight the com.hfad.catchat package in the app/src/main/java folder,
then go to File→New→Fragment→Fragment (Blank). Name the fragment
“SentItemsFragment”, name its layout “fragment_sent_items”, and make
sure the language is set to Kotlin. Then update the code for
SentItemsFragment.kt to match the code below:
And here’s the code for fragment_sent_items.xml (update your version of
this code too):
Add SentItemsFragment to the Navigation
graph
We want to be able to navigate to SentItemsFragment from the bottom
navigation bar using the Navigation component. To do this, we need to add
the fragment to the navigation graph as a new destination.
Open the navigation graph file nav_graph.xml (if it’s not already open),
then update its code so that it matches the code below (our changes are in
bold):
As you can see, the new destination has an ID of sentItemsFragment,
and a label of “Sent Items”. We’ll use the ID in the bottom navigation bar’s
menu resource file, which we’ll create next.
The bottom navigation bar needs a new
menu resource file
Earlier in the chapter, we created a menu resource file named
menu_toolbar.xml to add a Help item to the toolbar. While it’s possible for
different navigation UI components to share the same menu, we need to
create a new one for the bottom navigation bar because it shows two extra
items: Inbox and Sent Items.
To create the new menu resource file, select the app/src/main/res folder, go
to the File menu, choose New, and then select the option to create a new
Android resource file. When prompted, give it a name of “menu_main”,
specify a resource type of “Menu”, and make sure the directory name is
menu. When you click on the OK button, Android Studio will create the file
for you, and add it to the app/src/main/res/menu folder.
Next, open the file menu_main.xml (if it’s not already open), and update its
code to add menu items for InboxFragment, SentItemsFragment,
and HelpFragment (shown below in bold):
Now that we’ve created the new menu resource file, let’s add a bottom
navigation bar to MainActivity.
A bottom navigation bar is a type of View
Just like a toolbar, a bottom navigation bar is a type of view that you add to
your layout. The code to add a bottom navigation bar looks like this:
You start by defining the bottom navigation bar using:
<com.google.android.material.bottomnavigation.BottomNavigationVie
w
 ... />
where
com.google.android.material.bottomnavigation.Botto
mNavigationView is the fully qualified path of the
BottomNavigationView class: the class that defines the bar. You then
use extra attributes to give it an ID, and specify its appearance.
Unlike a toolbar, you don’t need to write Kotlin code to add menu items to
a bottom navigation bar. You simply specify which menu resource file to
add to the bar using the app:menu attribute like this:
app:menu="@menu/menu_main"
The above code attaches the menu_main.xml menu resource file to the
bottom navigation bar, and its items are added to the bar at runtime like
this:
Now that you’ve seen what bottom navigation bar code looks like, let’s add
one to MainActivity’s layout.
The full code for activity_main.xml
Here’s the full code for activity_main.xml: update your code to include the
changes below (in bold):
Now that we’ve added the bottom navigation bar to MainActivity’s
layout, let’s get it to navigate between destinations.
Link the bottom navigation bar to the
navigation controller
The code to make a bottom navigation bar navigate between destinations is
simpler than the code needed to implement toolbar navigation. All you need
to do is get a reference to the BottomNavigationView, which defines
the navigation bar, and call its setupWithNavController() method.
Here’s what the code looks like:
Each time you click on an item in the navigation bar, the navigation
controller fetches its ID and looks for a destination with a matching ID in
the navigation graph. It then passes this destination to the navigation host so
that it’s displayed on the device screen.
Let’s add the bottom navigation bar code to MainActivity.kt, and take the
app for a test drive.
The updated code for MainActivity.kt
Here’s the updated code for MainActivity.kt; update the code to include the
changes below (in bold):
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the CatChat app, MainActivity is launched, and
InboxFragment is displayed in MainActivity’s layout. A bottom
navigtion bar is displayed that contains three items.
When we click on each item in the bottom navigation bar, the app navigates
to the appropriate screen. When we click on Sent Items, for example,
SentItemsFragment is displayed in MainActivity, and when we
click on the Help item, HelpFragment is displayed instead.
The bottom navigation bar is working exactly how we want it to.
A navigation drawer lets you display many
navigation items
As you’ve learned, a bottom navigation bar is a good option if you have a
small number of navigation items because it allows you to display up to five
such items. But what if you have a larger number of menu items?
If you want users to be able to navigate through a large number of options, a
better choice might be a navigation drawer. This is a slide-out, scrollable
panel that contains links to other parts of the app that you can optionally
group into different sections.
Navigation drawers are widely used across Android apps. The Gmail app,
for example, uses a navigation drawer that lets you navigate to different
screens in the app, and contains sections such as email categories, recent
labels, and all labels:
Let’s replace the bottom navigation bar with
a navigation drawer
We’re going to replace the bottom navigation bar we added to the CatChat
app with a navigation drawer. The navigation drawer will contain a header
image and a set of options. The main options will let the user navigate to
InboxFragment and SentItemsFragment, and we’ll put a
HelpFragment item in a separate section labeled Support. Here’s what
the drawer will look like:
The navigation drawer is composed of several different components. We’ll
go through these on the next page.
Navigation drawers deconstructed
You implement a navigation drawer by adding a drawer layout to the root
of your activity’s layout. The drawer layout contains two views:
1. A view for the screen’s main content
This is usually a layout containing a toolbar and a navigation host,
which you use to display fragments.
2. A navigation view for the drawer’s contents
A navigation view is a type of frame layout that’s used to display a
navigation menu. In this app, it will display a drawer header too.
When the drawer is closed, the drawer layout looks just like a normal
activity, except that the toolbar includes a drawer icon that’s used to open
the drawer:
When you open the drawer, the navigation view slides over the activity’s
main content to display the drawer’s contents. When you click on an item, it
uses the Navigation component to display the relevant destination, and the
drawer closes:
The drawer gets its items from a menu
Just like a toolbar and bottom navigation bar, a navigation drawer gets the
items it needs to display from a menu resource file.
Instead of creating a new menu resource file for the drawer, we’re going to
reuse menu_main.xml: the file that we used for the bottom navigation bar.
Here’s a reminder of the current code in menu_main.xml:
The above menu resource file, when added to the navigation drawer,
produces a list of items with an icon against each one. We’re going to tweak
the menu to add an extra highlight to the item the user selects, and split the
menu into sections:
Let’s find out how.
Add the support section…
We’ll first add the Support heading, which is done by defining a new item.
Because it’s just a heading, we only need to give it a title: it doesn’t have an
icon, and no ID is required as we won’t use it to navigate anywhere.
Here’s the code to add the Support heading:
…as a separate submenu
We want the Help item to appear under the Support heading so that it forms
a separate section. To do this, we’ll define a submenu inside the Support
item, specified by a <menu> element. We’ll add the Help item to this
submenu.
Here’s the code to add a submenu, which includes a Help item; we’ll update
menu_main.xml with this code a couple pages ahead:
The above submenu just contains a single item. If you wanted it to contain
multiple items, you’d simply include each item in the submenu.
That’s all the code we need to add a Support section to the drawer’s menu.
Next, let’s find out how to add an extra highlight to the item the user
selects.
Highlight the selected item with groups
The current menu produces a navigation drawer that changes the text color
of the current selected item. You can make it extra clear to the user which
item has been selected by adding an extra highlight like this:
You add this extra highlight by placing items in a group using the
<group> element. You then use an attribute named
android:checkableBehavior to specify the group’s behavior when
an item is selected.
Here’s the code to do this (we’ll update menu_main.xml on the next page):
As you can see, the above code sets the
android:checkableBehavior attribute to "single". This option
means that only a single item in the group at a time will be highlighted—the
option the user selects.
That’s everything we need to make the menu look and behave the way we
want when it’s used by a navigation drawer. We’ll show you the full code
on the next page.
The full code for menu_main.xml
We’re going to update the navigation drawer’s menu so that the Help menu
is shown in a Support section. We’ll also use groups to add an extra
highlight to the item the user selects.
Here’s the complete code for menu_main.xml; update its code to include all
the changes (in bold):
That’s the menu sorted. Next, we’ll create the navigation drawer’s header.
Create the navigation drawer’s header
The navigation drawer’s header is a simple layout that we’ll add to a new
layout file named nav_header.xml.
Create this file now by selecting the app/src/main/res/layout folder in
Android Studio, and choosing File→New→Layout Resource File. When
prompted, name the layout “nav_header”, and if prompted, choose a
resource type of Layout.
Add the image file…
The layout is composed of a single image, which needs to be added to the
app/src/main/res/drawable folder. Android Studio probably created this
folder for you when you created the project. If it’s not there, create it by
selecting the app/src/main/res folder, going to the File menu, choose the
New option, and then clicking on the option to create a new Android
resource directory. When prompted, choose a resource type of Drawable,
name it “drawable”, and click on OK.
Once you’ve created the drawable folder, download the file
kitten_small.webp from tinyurl.com/hfad3, and add it to the drawable
folder.
…and update the nav_header.xml code
We’ll add the image to nav_header.xml using an <ImageView> element.
You already know how to use this element, so update the code for
nav_header.xml to match the code below:
Now that we have a header for the navigation drawer, let’s add the drawer
itself.
How to create a navigation drawer
You create a navigation drawer by adding a DrawerLayout to the
activity’s layout as its root element. The DrawerLayout needs to contain
two things: a view or view group for the activity’s content as its first
element, and a navigation view that defines the drawer’s contents as its
second.
Typical DrawerLayout code looks like this:
There are two key <NavigationView> attributes that you use to control
the drawer’s appearance: app:headerLayout and app:menu.
The app:headerLayout attribute specifies the layout that should be
used for the navigation drawer’s header (in this case nav_header.xml). This
attribute is optional.
The app:menu attribute specifies which menu resource file contains the
drawer’s options (in this case menu_main.xml). If you don’t include this
attribute, your navigation drawer won’t include any items.
The full code for activity_main.xml
We want to replace the MainActivity’s bottom navigation bar with a
navigation drawer. The code to do this is shown below; update file
activity_main.xml to include the changes (in bold):
We’ve added a navigation drawer to the layout
We’ve now replaced the bottom navigation bar in MainActivity’s
layout with a navigation drawer. It displays an image in its header, and
includes all the items specified in the menu resource file menu_main.xml.
Before we run the app, however, we need to link the navigation drawer to
the navigation controller so that clicking on an item navigates to the correct
fragment.
We also need to configure the toolbar so that it includes a drawer icon that,
when clicked, will open or close the navigation drawer:
Both of these changes are made by tweaking the code in MainActivity.kt.
Let’s find out how.
Configure the toolbar’s drawer icon…
Earlier in the chapter, we configured the toolbar to display the current
destination’s label and include an Up button. We did this by building an
AppBarConfiguration object, and linking it to the toolbar.
We now want the toolbar to include a drawer icon, and we can add one by
adding the navigation drawer to the AppBarConfiguration. Here’s the
code to do this:
The above code adds the drawer layout to the AppBarConfiguration
object. This allows the toolbar to interact with the drawer by including a
drawer icon on every screen where there’s no Up button.
…and link the drawer to the navigation controller
Finally, we need to make the drawer navigate to the correct destination each
time the user clicks on one of its items. Just like with the bottom navigation
bar, we do this by setting the navigation drawer up with the navigation
controller.
Here’s the code to do this:
val navHostFragment = supportFragmentManager
 .findFragmentById(R.id.nav_host_fragment) as NavHostFragment
val navController = navHostFragment.navController
val navView = findViewById<NavigationView>(R.id.nav_view)
NavigationUI.setupWithNavController(navView, navController)
Each time the user clicks on an item in the navigation drawer, the
navigation controller gets its ID from the menu resource file, and looks for
a matching ID in the navigation graph. It then navigates to the destination
with that ID.
That’s all the code we need to control the navigation drawer’s behavior.
Let’s add it to MainActivity.kt and take the app for a test drive.
The full code for MainActivity.kt
We need to update MainActivity to replace the bottom navigation code
with the code for the navigation drawer. Update MainActivity.kt with the
changes below (in bold):
That’s all the code we need for the navigation drawer. Let’s take it for a test
drive.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Why did we remove the bottom navigation bar? Can’t an app
have both a bottom navigation bar and a navigation drawer?
A: Apps can have bottom navigation bars and navigation drawers. We
decided to replace the bottom navigation bar with a navigation drawer
in order to make it clearer what code was needed just for the navigation
drawer.
Q: I’d heard that it took lots of activity code to create a navigation
drawer. Did I hear wrong?
A: In the old days, adding a navigation drawer to your app took lots of
effort.
Including a navigation drawer is now much easier thanks to the
Navigation component. It handles most of the hard work for you,
making your activity code much simpler.
Q: How does the navigation drawer know which fragment to
navigate to?
A: The activity code includes a call to the
setupWithNavController() method, and this links the drawer’s
navigation view to the navigation controller.
When an item in the drawer is clicked, the ID of this item is passed to
the navigation controller. The navigation controller looks up this ID in
the navigation graph, and navigates to the destination with a matching
ID.
Q: Can you remind me what a navigation view is?
A: It’s a type of frame layout that is used to display a standard
navigation menu. It’s usually used inside a navigation drawer.
Q: I tried clicking on one of the items, but the drawer didn’t
navigate to the right fragment. Why not?
A: First, make sure that your activity code calls the
setupWithNavController() method. This links the drawer to
the navigation controller, so if it’s missing, your drawer won’t be able to
use the Navigation component.
Next, make sure that you have matching IDs in the drawer’s menu
resource file and the navigation graph. If the navigation controller can’t
find a matching ID, it won’t be able to use it to navigate.
Test Drive
When we run the app, a drawer icon is displayed in the toolbar. Clicking on
this icon opens the navigation drawer. When we click on one of the items in
the drawer, the fragment for that option is displayed in MainActivity
and the drawer closes.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to create a fully operational
navigation drawer.
Layout Magnets
Somebody used fridge magnets to write the layout code for a navigation
drawer, but some of them fell off overnight. Can you put the code back
together again?
The activity uses a linear layout for its main content (we’ve left out most of
the code for this). The drawer needs to display a header, defined in a layout
file named header.xml. Its menu items are specified in the menu resource
file menu_drawer.xml.
Layout Magnets Solution
Somebody used fridge magnets to write the layout code for a navigation
drawer, but some of them fell off overnight. Can you put the code back
together again?
The activity uses a linear layout for its main content (we’ve left out most of
the code for this). The drawer needs to display a header, defined in a layout
file named header.xml. Its menu items are specified in the menu resource
file menu_drawer.xml.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 8 under your belt and now you’ve added
navigation UI to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
The default app bar is added using a theme.
The android:theme attribute in AndroidManifest.xml
specifies which theme to apply.
You define styles as <style> elements in one or more
resource files.
You can replace the default app bar with a toolbar that includes
the latest Android features.
A Material toolbar is a toolbar that works well with Material
themes.
A menu resource file adds items to toolbars, bottom navigation
bars, and navigation drawers.
Make sure there are matching item and destination IDs in the
menu resource file and navigation graph. The Navigation
component depends on matching IDs for navigation.
Add items to a toolbar using onCreateOptionsMenu().
Implement toolbar navigation using
onOptionsItemSelected().
Use an AppBarConfiguration object to configure the
toolbar to work with the Navigation component.
A bottom navigation bar can hold up to five items.
A navigation drawer can hold many items, grouped into
sections.
Create a navigation drawer by adding a drawer layout to your
activity’s layout. The drawer layout’s first element needs to be
a view that defines the activity’s main content. Its second
element defines the contents of the drawer.
Chapter 9. Material Views: A
Material World
Most apps need a slick UI that responds to the user.
You’ve so far learned how to use views such as text views, buttons and
spinners, and applied Material themes to make sweeping changes to your
app’s look and feel. But there’s so much more you can do. Here, you’ll
learn how to make your UI more responsive with the coordinator layout.
You’ll create toolbars that can collapse or scroll on a whim. You’ll
discover exciting new views such as checkboxes, radio buttons, chips,
and floating action buttons. Finally, you’ll find out how to display friendly
pop-up messages using toasts and snackbars. Read on to find out more.
Material is used throughout Androidville
In the previous chapter you learned how to use toolbars, bottom navigation
bars, and navigation drawers to help users navigate your app, and styled
them using a theme from the Material library. As you may recall, Material
is a design system that helps you build apps with a consistent look and feel
across all screens.
Material isn’t just limited to toolbars, navigation drawers, and bottom
navigation bars; it styles every view in your app, from buttons to text views.
Here are some more examples of components and features that use
Material:
Scrolling and collapsing toolbars
You can make the toolbar scroll off the screen, or collapse, if the
user scrolls content.
Radio buttons, checkboxes, and chips
These let the user choose options.
Floating action buttons (FABs)
FABs are special buttons that float above the main screen.
Snackbars
These are pop-up messages you can interact with.
We’re going to show you how to use these views and features by building a
new app.
The Bits and Pizzas app
We’re going to build a new app named Bits and Pizzas. We’re going to
focus on its Create Order screen, which lets the user place an order for a
pizza.
The screen looks like this:
The app is comprised of an activity—MainActivity—that displays a
fragment named OrderFragment. The fragment defines the Create
Order screen’s appearance and functionality.
Let’s go through the steps we need to take to build the app.
Here’s what we’ll do
We’ll build the app by going through the following steps:
1. Add a toolbar that can scroll.
We’ll create OrderFragment, and add a toolbar to its layout that
will scroll off the screen when the user scrolls the screen up, and
reappear when they scroll down.
2. Implement a collapsing toolbar.
Once we’ve made the toolbar scroll, we’ll add an image to it, and
get it to collapse and expand when the user scrolls the screen.
3. Add views.
The user needs to be able to place a pizza order. We’ll enable this
by adding radio buttons, chips, and a floating action button to
OrderFragment’s layout.
4. Make the FAB respond to clicks.
When the user clicks the FAB, we’ll display a pop-up message that
gives details of her order.
Create the Bits and Pizzas project
We’re going to create a new project for the Bits and Pizzas app, so you need
to create one using the same steps from previous chapters. Choose the
Empty Activity option, enter a name of “Bits and Pizzas” and a package
name of “com.hfad.bitsandpizzas”, and accept the default save location.
Make sure the language is set to Kotlin and the minimum SDK is API 21 so
it will run on most Android devices.
Add a Material library dependency to the app
build.gradle file
In this chapter, we’re going to use themes, views, and features from the
Material library, so we need to make sure that the app’s build.gradle file
includes it as a dependency.
Open the file BitsandPizzas/app/build.gradle, and make sure that its
dependencies section includes the following line (in bold):
It’s likely that Android Studio has already added this dependency to the file
for you. If not, you’ll need to add it yourself, and click on the Sync Now
option that appears at the top of the code editor to sync the change with the
rest of your project.
Now that you’ve made sure that the app includes the Material library, let’s
go and create OrderFragment.
Create OrderFragment
OrderFragment is the Bits and Pizzas app’s main screen, and it’s what
the user will use to place a pizza order.
To create the fragment, highlight the com.hfad.bitsandpizzas package in the
app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Fragment→Fragment
(Blank). Name the fragment “OrderFragment” and its layout
“fragment_order”, and make sure the language is set to Kotlin. Then update
the code for OrderFragment.kt to match the code below:
Then update the code in its layout file fragment_order.xml so that it
includes a frame layout like this:
We’ll update OrderFragment through the rest of this chapter. First, let’s
display it in MainActivity’s layout.
Display OrderFragment in MainActivity’s
layout
We’ll add OrderFragment to MainActivity’s layout using a
FragmentContainerView, specifying the name of the fragment.
Here’s the code to do this; open activity_main.xml and update its code to
include the changes below:
Finally, open MainActivity.kt and make sure that its code matches the code
shown below:
Now that we’ve got MainActivity to display OrderFragment, let’s
find out how to make the app bar respond to scrolls.
Replace the default app bar with a toolbar
We’re going to make the Bits and Pizzas app bar respond when the user
scrolls. For now, we’ll make it scroll off the screen when the user scrolls the
screen up, and make it reappear when she scrolls down again.
To do this, we first need to replace the default app bar with a toolbar. This is
because the default app bar is fixed to the top of the screen, and can’t be
made to scroll. A toolbar, however, is much more flexible.
To do this, we first need to change the app’s theme to one that has no app
bar. Open the file themes.xml in the app/src/main/res/values folder, and
update its code to include the style below in bold:
If your project includes a themes.xml file in the values-night folder, you’ll
need to apply the above change to this file as well.
Once you’ve made this change, add a toolbar to FragmentOrder by
updating the fragment_order.xml code so it matches the code shown here:
Fragments don’t have a
setSupportActionBar() method
Now that we’ve added the toolbar, we need to make it behave like a proper
app bar that displays the app’s name. As you learned in the previous
chapter, this is done by calling the activity’s setSupportActionBar()
method.
Here, we’ve added the toolbar to a fragment, and fragments don’t include
a setSupportActionBar() method. To get around this, we’ll get a
reference to the activity that’s displaying the fragment (using activity),
cast it to an AppCompatActivity to reflect its type, and call its
setSupportActionBar() method.
Here’s the code to do this:
Here’s the full code for OrderFragment.kt; update your code to include the
changes (in bold):
We’ve added the toolbar…now what?
We’ve now added a toolbar to OrderFragment’s layout so that when the
app runs, the toolbar is displayed at the top of the screen:
If we try and scroll the screen, however, the toolbar doesn’t move. To make
it respond to scrolls, we need to make a few more changes.
We want the toolbar to respond to scrolls
To make the toolbar move, we need to add more views to the fragment’s
layout. The layout needs to follow the following structure:
The layout needs to include three things: a coordinator layout, an app bar
layout, and a nested scroll view. Together, they let the toolbar respond
when the user scrolls the screen.
Let’s find out what each one does, starting with the coordinator layout.
The coordinator layout coordinates
animations between views
A coordinator layout is like a souped-up frame layout that’s used to
coordinate animations between different views. It can, for example,
coordinate the user scrolling the layout’s main content with the toolbar
moving off the screen.
You add a coordinator layout to your layout code like this:
You need to include any views whose animations you want to coordinate in
the coordinator layout. In the Bits and Pizzas app, for example, we want to
coordinate two things: the user scrolling the layout’s main contents, and the
toolbar scrolling off the screen. This means the toolbar and the screen’s
main contents need to be included in the coordinator layout:
A CoordinatorLayout allows the behavior of one view to affect the
behavior of another.
The CoordinatorLayout is usually the root element of your layout.
Now that we know what the coordinator layout does, let’s move on to the
app bar layout.
The app bar layout enables toolbar
animation
An app bar layout is a type of vertical linear layout that’s designed to work
with app bars. It works with the coordinator layout to enable toolbar
animation.
You add an app bar layout to your code like this:
As you can see, the above app bar layout code includes an
android:theme attribute like this:
android:theme="@style/ThemeOverlay.MaterialComponents.Dark.Action
Bar"
This applies the specified style to the app bar layout and all of its views. In
this example, it means that the toolbar—and anything else we add to the
app bar layout—will be styled to use the Material theme’s app bar
properties, including the color of its background and text.
Great! Now your toolbar is animated and can respond to scroll events. But
that’s not the end of the story: you also need to specify how it should
respond. Let’s see how this is done.
Tell the toolbar how to respond to scroll
events
Once you’ve added an app bar layout, you tell the toolbar how to respond to
scrolls by adding an app:layout_scrollFlags attribute to the toolbar and
assigning a value to it. The value specifies how the toolbar should respond
to scroll events.
In the Bits and Pizzas app, we want the toolbar to scroll upward off the
screen when the user scrolls up, and quickly return to its original position
when the user scrolls down. We can achieve this by setting the toolbar’s
app:layout_scrollFlags attribute to "scroll|enterAlways"
using code like this:
The toolbar MUST be inside an app bar layout in order for it to scroll.
The app bar layout and coordinator layout work together to enable
scrolling.
The line:
app:layout_scrollFlags="scroll|enterAlways"
specifies two behaviors: scroll and enterAlways.
The scroll value means that the view can scroll off the top of the screen
when the user scrolls up. Without this value, the toolbar would stay pinned
to the top of the screen and wouldn’t be able to scroll.
The enterAlways value means that the toolbar quickly scrolls down to
its original position when the user scrolls down. The toolbar would still
scroll down without this value, but it would be much slower.
You’re almost there! There’s just one more step you need to do before we
can get the OrderFragment toolbar to scroll: the nested scroll view.
A nested scroll view makes layout content
scrollable
You now need to add a nested scroll view so the layout’s main content can
scroll. This kind of view works just like a normal scroll view, except that it
enables nested scrolling. This is important, because the coordinator layout
only listens for nested scroll events. If you use a normal scroll view in your
layout, the toolbar won’t be able to respond when the user scrolls the
screen.
NOTE
Another view that enables nested scrolling is the recycler view. You’ll learn about this
view in Chapter 14.
You add a nested scroll view to your layout using code like this:
In the above example, the nested scroll view includes an extra attribute
named app:layout_behavior, which is set to the built-in String
value "@string/appbar_scrolling_view_behavior". This
makes sure that the contents of the nested scroll view are arranged below
the app bar layout, and move when it scrolls.
Note that a nested scroll view can only have one direct child, which, in
the example above, is a text view. If you want to add more than one view to
a nested scroll view, you must first add them to a view group—such as a
linear layout—and then add the view group to the nested scroll view.
NOTE
You’ll see an example of this later in the chapter.
That’s everything that we need to know in order to get the Bits and Pizzas
toolbar to scroll, so let’s go ahead and update OrderFragment’s layout.
The full code for fragment_order.xml
Here’s the full code for fragment_order.xml; update the code to include the
changes below (in bold):
Test Drive
When we run the app, OrderFragment is displayed in
MainActivity’s layout. A toolbar is displayed at the top of the screen.
When we scroll the screen up, the toolbar scrolls upward off the top of the
screen.
When we scroll the main content down, the toolbar reappears.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to create a toolbar that responds
to scrolls.
After the following exercise, we’re going to learn how to turn the scrolling
toolbar into one that collapses and expands as the user scrolls the screen.
BE the Layout
Below is the layout file for a fragment named MyFragment. Your job is
to play like you’re the layout, and change the code so that when the
user scrolls the screen up, the toolbar scrolls off the screen, and when
they scroll down, it quickly reappears.
BE the Layout Solution
Below is the layout file for a fragment named MyFragment. Your job is
to play like you’re the layout, and change the code so that when the
user scrolls the screen up, the toolbar scrolls off the screen, and when
they scroll down, it quickly reappears.
Let’s create a collapsing toolbar
Now that you know how to make a toolbar scroll off the screen, let’s
replace it with a slightly different type of toolbar: a collapsing toolbar.
A collapsing toolbar is a toolbar that starts off large, shrinks when the user
scrolls the screen up, and expands again when the user scrolls the screen
back down. You can even add an image to it, which disappears when the
toolbar reaches its minimum height, and becomes visible again as the
toolbar expands:
Over the next few pages, we’re going to find out how to turn a simple
toolbar into a collapsing toolbar by adding one to OrderFragment’s
layout. We’ll start with a plain collapsing toolbar first, and then create one
that includes an image.
Let’s get started.
How to create a plain collapsing toolbar
It’s relatively straightforward to turn a scrolling toolbar into a collapsing
toolbar. You simply wrap the toolbar in a collapsing toolbar layout, and
tweak the toolbar attributes. The basic code structure looks like this:
As you can see, the collapsing toolbar layout is defined using the
<...CollapsingToolbarLayout> element, part of the
com.google.android.material library. You specify its maximum height using
its layout_height attribute, and the line:
tells it to collapse when the user scrolls up until it has nothing left to
collapse, and expand when the user scrolls down until it reaches its full
height.
We also need to make sure that when the toolbar collapses, anything that’s
displayed on the toolbar—like the Up button and any menu items—stay on
the screen. This is achieved by adding the following attribute to the
Toolbar element:
How to add an image to a collapsing toolbar
Once you’ve created a plain collapsing toolbar, you can add an image to it
by adding an <ImageView> to the collapsing toolbar layout, specifying
the image you want to use. The code follows this structure:
The line:
app:contentScrim="?attr/colorPrimary"
which has been added to the <...CollapsingToolbarLayout>
gives the toolbar a plain background color when it’s collapsed. We’ve also
added a parallax animation to the image using this line:
app:layout_collapseMode="parallax"
This attribute is optional: it makes the image scroll at a different rate to the
rest of the toolbar.
Now that you’ve learned about collapsing toolbars, let’s add one to
OrderFragment’s layout.
Add a restaurant image drawable
We want OrderFragment’s collapsing toolbar to include a restaurant
image, so let’s start by adding it to the project.
Make sure that your project includes a folder named
app/src/main/res/drawable, then download the file restaurant.webp from
tinyurl.com/hfad3, and add it to the drawable folder. This includes the
image in your project as a drawable resource.
Next, let’s add the collapsing toolbar.
The full code for fragment_order.xml
The code below adds a collapsing toolbar to OrderFragment’s layout.
Update your code for fragment_order.xml to include the changes (in bold):
Those are all the changes that we need to create the collapsing toolbar. Let’s
take the app for a test drive, and see what it looks like.
Test Drive
When we run the app, OrderFragment is displayed. It includes a
collapsing toolbar with an image.
When we scroll up, the toolbar collapses, the image fades, and the toolbar’s
background changes to the app’s primary color. When we scroll down, the
toolbar expands, and the image reappears.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Is the collapsing toolbar layout a type of view group?
A: Yes. It’s actually a subclass of FrameLayout, so you can use any
of FrameLayout’s attributes with it.
Q: Do I have to write any Kotlin code to get the toolbar to collapse?
A: No, it’s all done using layout code.
Q: You said that the coordinator layout coordinates animations
between its views. Are there any alternatives?
A: Yes, there’s a newer kind of layout you can use called a motion
layout. This layout is part of the constraint layout library, from version
2.0 upward.
You can find out more about motion layouts here:
https://developer.android.com/training/constraint-layout/motionlayout
Layout Magnets
Someone arranged some magnets on the fridge door to show how to
structure a layout file that implements a collapsing toolbar with an image.
Unfortunately, the magnets fell off when a large pterodactyl flew by in
search of food.
See if you can put the magnets back in the right order.
Answers in “Layout Magnets Solution”.
We need to build OrderFragment’s main
content
Now that we’ve added a collapsing toolbar to OrderFragment’s layout,
we need to add some more views. These will let the user choose which type
of pizza she wants to order, add any extra options such as parmesan or chili
oil, and display a message when she clicks a button. The screen needs to
look something like this:
As you can see, OrderFragment’s layout includes some extra views that
we haven’t yet learned how to use. Before we build the layout, let’s find out
more about these views.
Choose a pizza type using a radio button
The first view we’ll use is a group of radio buttons so that the user can
choose which type of pizza she wants. Radio buttons let you display
multiple options from which you make a single choice, so they’re a good
choice for this situation.
You add radio buttons to a layout using two elements: <RadioButton>
and <RadioGroup>. You use the <RadioButton> element to define
each radio button, and you group them by putting them inside a
<RadioGroup> element. Placing the radio buttons in a radio group in this
way means that only a single radio button can be selected at a time.
In the Bits and Pizzas app, we want to display radio buttons for the Diavolo
and Funghi buttons. The code looks like this:
Once you’ve defined the radio group and radio buttons, you can write
Kotlin code to find out which radio button has been selected using the radio
group’s checkedRadioButtonId property. Its value is the ID of the
selected radio button, or -1 if no radio button has been selected:
RadioGroup is a subclass of LinearLayout, so you can use the same
attributes with a radio group as you can with a linear layout.
Radio buttons are a type of compound
button
Behind the scenes, radio buttons inherit from a class named
CompoundButton: a subclass of Button. A compound button is a
button that has two states: checked and unchecked, or on and off.
Android includes other types of compound button (in addition to radio
buttons), such as checkboxes, switches, and toggle buttons. These views
are useful if you want to offer the user yes/no choices, such as “Do you
want chili oil?” or “Would you like extra parmesan?”
You add checkboxes, switches, and toggle buttons to your layout using code
like this:
You can then use each view’s isChecked property in your Kotlin code to
find out if it has been selected, as in the example code here:
A chip is a type of flexible compound button
So far, you’ve seen how to use different types of compound buttons such as
radio buttons, checkboxes and switches. A more flexible type of compound
button is a chip. This is a material view that’s available so long as you’re
using a theme from the Material library, for example
Theme.MaterialComponents.DayNight.NoActionBar. It’s
used for making yes/no choices like other types of compound button, but it
has other uses too: it can also be used for user input, filtering data and
performing actions.
In the Bits and Pizzas app, we’re going to use chips to let the user say
whether she wants extra parmesan or chili oil on her pizza.
You add a chip to your layout using code like this:
The key part of the chip code is the style attribute, because this controls
the chip’s appearance. The code:
style="@style/Widget.MaterialComponents.Chip.Choice"
in the above example styles the chip as a Choice so that its color changes
when its selected. Other options are Entry (which lets you use chips for data
input), Filter (which is used for chips that filter content), and Action (which
acts like a button).
Here’s what the Entry, Filter, and Action chips look like:
As well as adding single chips to your layout, you can group several chips
together. Let’s find out how this is done.
Add multiple chips to a chip group
If you want your layout to include multiple chips that are grouped together,
you can add them to a chip group. A chip group is a type of view group
that’s designed to neatly arrange multiple chips.
In the Bits and Pizzas app, we want to use two chips: one for parmesan and
another for chili oil. We’ll therefore group them in a chip group using code
like this:
Use isChecked to find out if a chip is checked
Once you’ve added chips to your layout, you can find out if a chip has been
selected using each chip’s isChecked property, just as you can with other
types of compound button such as switches, toggle buttons, and
checkboxes. The following code, for example, checks whether the
parmesan chip has been selected:
val parmesan = view.findViewById<Chip>(R.id.parmesan)
if (parmesan.isChecked) {
 //do something
}
SERIOUS CODING
Chips are very flexible and have many different options. Find out more
about these options here:
https://material.io/develop/android/components/chips
A FAB is a floating action button
There’s one final view we need to learn about before we can complete
OrderFragment’s layout: a FAB.
A FAB—or floating action button—is a circular button that floats above
the user interface. It’s used to draw attention to common or important
actions, and just like a normal button, you can make a FAB respond to
clicks by assigning an OnClickListener to it in your Kotlin code.
You add a FAB to your layout using code like this:
The above code uses the layout_gravity attribute to anchor a FAB to
the bottom-end corner of the device screen with a margin of 16dp.
The line:
android:src="@android:drawable/ic_menu_send"
adds an icon to the FAB. In the above example, it displays one of Android’s
built-in icons named ic_menu_send, but you can use any kind of drawable
so long as it fits on the FAB.
NOTE
When you add a src attribute to a FAB, the code editor lets you browse Android’s builtin icons. If you don’t like any of them, you can find lots more here:
https://material.io/resources/icons
You usually use a FAB inside a coordinator layout so that you can
coordinate movement between the different views in your layout. Let’s look
at an example.
You can anchor a FAB to a collapsing toolbar
FABs are often positioned at the bottom-end corner of the screen, but you
can also anchor one to another view such as a collapsing toolbar. When you
do this, the FAB moves with the collapsing toolbar as it collapses and
expands:
The layout code for this is shown below. As you can see, it uses the FAB’s
app:layout_anchor and app:layout_anchorGravity attributes
to anchor the FAB to the bottom end of the collapsing toolbar:
Now that you’ve learned about radio buttons, chips, FABs, and other views,
let’s build the main content for OrderFragment’s layout.
We need to build OrderFragment’s layout
We need to add views to OrderFragment’s layout so that the user can
order a pizza type, and request any extras. The layout needs to look like
this:
You’re already familiar with all the code that’s needed to create this layout,
so let’s go and update fragment_order.xml. We’ll show you the full code
over the next few pages.
The full code for fragment_order.xml
Here’s the complete code for OrderFragment’s layout. Update the code
for file fragment_order.xml so that it includes the changes below (in bold):
That’s all the layout code we need, so let’s take the app for a test drive and
see what it looks like.
Test Drive
When we run the app, OrderFragment is displayed in
MainActivity. It includes a collapsing toolbar as before, but this time
the main content features text views, radio buttons, chips, and a FAB.
When we scroll the device screen, the main content scrolls upward and the
toolbar collapses. The FAB remains fixed in the bottom-end corner of the
screen.
Let’s make the FAB respond to clicks
We’ve now built OrderFragment’s layout, but when the user clicks on
the FAB, nothing happens. Let’s update the fragment’s Kotlin code so that
the FAB responds to clicks.
We’ll make the FAB do two things:
1. Display a message if no pizza has been chosen.
We need the user to select which type of pizza she wants. If she
clicks the FAB without choosing one, we’ll display a pop-up
message (called a toast) telling them to choose a pizza.
2. Display their order in a separate message.
If the user has selected a type of pizza, we’ll display a message
telling them what she has ordered. We’ll use a different type of
pop-up message for this called a snackbar.
NOTE
In the real world, you’d want the app to place the pizza order when the user
clicks on the FAB. Here, we just want to make the FAB do something (and
it’s a good excuse for teaching you about pop-up messages).
Let’s begin by making the FAB respond to clicks.
Add an OnClickListener to the FAB
As we said earlier, you make a FAB respond to clicks in the same way that
you make any other type of button respond to clicks: by attaching an
OnClickListener to the FAB.
Here’s the code to add an OnClickListener to the FAB in
OrderFragment; as you can see, it looks the same as the code you’ve
used with plain old normal buttons:
Next, let’s get the OnClickListener to display a message if the user
hasn’t selected a type of pizza.
Find out if a pizza type has been selected
We can find out whether the user has selected a pizza type using the
checkedRadioButtonId property of the pizzas_group radio
group. The property’s value is the ID of the selected radio button if one has
been selected, and -1 if the user hasn’t made a choice.
Here’s the code to check whether the user has clicked the FAB without
choosing which type of pizza she wants:
If the user hasn’t selected a type of pizza, we want to display a message in a
pop-up message called a toast. Let’s find out how to do this.
A toast is a simple pop-up message
If the user clicks on the FAB without first choosing a pizza type, we’re
going to display a toast on the device screen. A toast is a simple pop-up
message that gives the user information, and automatically disappears when
it times out:
You create a toast by calling Toast.makeText(). The makeText
method takes three parameters: a Context (usually this or activity,
depending on whether you’re calling the toast from an activity or a
fragment), a CharSequence! that’s the message you want to display, and
a duration. You then call the toast’s show() method to display it.
Here’s some example code that displays a message in a toast that appears on
screen for a short duration:
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: My toasts don’t appear when I run the app in the emulator. Any
ideas?
A: First, make sure you’ve called the toast’s show() method. Without
this, the toast won’t appear.
If this doesn’t help, you may have encountered a known emulator issue,
which means toasts don’t always pop up. Try closing the emulator, and
open the AVD Manager from the Tools menu. Then select the virtual
device, and choose the Wipe Data option from its list of actions.
Add a toast to the FAB OnClickListener
We want to display a toast when the user clicks on the FAB without
choosing a pizza type. The code to do this is shown below:
That’s everything we need to do if the user hasn’t selected a pizza type.
Next, let’s write the code to display their order.
Display the pizza order in a snackbar
If the user has chosen a pizza type, we’re going to display their order in a
pop-up message called a snackbar when she clicks on the FAB. A snackbar
is like a toast, except that it’s more interactive. You can swipe a snackbar
away, for example, or make it do something if it’s clicked.
You create a snackbar by calling Snackbar.make(). The make method
takes three parameters: the View that triggered the snackbar (in this case a
FAB), a CharSequence! that’s the text you want to display, and a
duration. You then display the snackbar by calling its show() method.
Here’s some example snackbar code that displays a message on the screen
for a short time:
In the above code, we’ve used LENGTH_SHORT to show the snackbar for a
short period of time. Other options are LENGTH_LONG (which shows it for
a long duration) and LENGTH_INDEFINITE (which shows it
indefinitely).
Snackbars can have actions
If you want, you can add an action to the snackbar so that the user can, say,
undo an action she’s just performed. You do this by calling the snackbar’s
setAction() method before calling show(). setAction takes two
parameters: the text that should appear for the action, and a lambda that
runs when the user clicks on the action.
Here’s an example of some snackbar code that includes an action:
Snackbars are usually displayed at the bottom of the screen, but you can
override this using the snackbar’s setAnchorView() method. This
anchors the snackbar to a particular view so that the snackbar appears above
it. This is useful if, for example, you want the snackbar to appear above a
bottom navigation bar:
The snackbar code for the pizza order
Now that you know how to create a snackbar, let’s write the code to display
the user’s pizza order. We’ll show a snackbar that displays the pizza type
the user has selected, along with any extras such as parmesan or chili oil.
Here’s the code to display the snackbar:
That’s all the Kotlin code we need for the Bits and Pizzas app. Let’s look at
the full code for OrderFragment.kt and take the app for a test drive.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Are toasts and snackbars types of view? Can I include them in
my layouts?
A: No, they’re not views, so you can only make them appear on your
screen using Kotlin code.
Q: Can I use multiple FABs in a single layout?
A: It’s best if you don’t use more than one FAB per screen. They’re
used for important actions, so if you use too many, they lose their
impact.
The full code for OrderFragment.kt
Here’s the full code for OrderFragment.kt; update the code to include the
changes below (in bold):
Test Drive
When we click on the FAB without selecting a pizza type, a toast is
displayed asking us to choose a pizza.
When we select a pizza type and click on the FAB again, a snackbar
appears at the bottom of the screen giving details of our order.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to make the FAB respond to
clicks by displaying a pop-up message.
Pool Puzzle
Your goal is to complete the fragment code below so that when a FAB with
an ID of fab is clicked, it displays a snackbar. The snackbar should include
an action, “Undo”, which shows a toast when clicked. Take code snippets
from the pool and place them into the blank lines in the code. You may not
use the same snippet more than once, and you won’t need to use all the
snippets.
override fun onCreateView(
 inflater: LayoutInflater, container: ViewGroup?,
savedInstanceState: Bundle?
): View? {
 val view = inflater.inflate(R.layout.fragment_order,
container, false)
 val fab = view.findViewById<FloatingActionButton>(R.id.fab)
 fab.setOnClickListener {
 Snackbar..........(fab, "Your order has been
updated",......................)
 .setAction("Undo") {
 Toast..........(.........,
"Undone!",......................)
 ..........
 }
 ..........
 }
 return view
}
NOTE
Note: each thing from the pool can only be used once!
Pool Puzzle Solution
Your goal is to complete the fragment code below so that when a FAB with
an ID of fab is clicked, it displays a snackbar. The snackbar should include
an action, “Undo”, which shows a toast when clicked. Take code snippets
from the pool and place them into the blank lines in the code. You may not
use the same snippet more than once, and you won’t need to use all the
snippets.
Layout Magnets Solution
Someone arranged some magnets on the fridge door to show how to
structure a layout file that implements a collapsing toolbar with an image.
Unfortunately, the magnets fell off when a large pterodactyl flew by in
search of food.
See if you can put the magnets back in the right order.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 9 under your belt and now you’ve added more
views and components to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
Use a CoordinatorLayout to coordinate animations
between views.
Animate toolbars using an AppBarLayout.
Use a NestedScrollView if you want views to respond to
the user scrolling the device screen.
Use a CollapsingToolbarLayout to add a toolbar that
collapses and grows in response to user scroll actions.
To define a group of radio buttons, first use <RadioGroup>
to define the radio group. Then put individual radio buttons in
the radio group using <RadioButton>.
Radio buttons, toggle buttons, switches, and checkboxes are all
types of compound button. A compound button is a button that
can be switched on or off.
A chip is a more flexible compound button that can be used for
making choices, user input, filtering data and performing
actions.
You can put multiple chips in a chip group.
Use a FAB (floating action button) to display common or
important user actions.
A toast is a type of pop-up message.
A snackbar is another type of pop-up message that the user can
interact with.
Chapter 10. View Binding:
Bound Together
It’s time to wave farewell to findViewById().
As you’ve probably noticed by now, the more views you have and the more
interactive your apps become, the more calls you need to make to
findViewById(). And if you’re getting tired of typing the code for this
method every time you want to work with a view, you’re not alone. In this
chapter, you’ll discover how to make findViewById() a thing of the past
by implementing view binding. You’ll find out how to apply this technique
to both activity and fragment code, and you’ll learn why this approach is a
safer, more efficient way of accessing your layout’s views. Let’s get
started…
Behind the scenes of findViewById()
As you already know, each time you want to interact with a view in your
activity or fragment code, you first call findViewById() to get a
reference to it. The following activity code, for example, gets a reference to
a Button with the ID start_button so that it can respond to clicks:
But what actually happens when findViewById() gets called?
findViewById() looks for a view in the view hierarchy
The following things happen when the above code runs:
1. The MainActivity’s layout file (activity_main.xml) is inflated
into a hierarchy of View objects.
If the file describes a linear layout that contains a text view and a
button, the layout gets inflated into LinearLayout, TextView,
and Button objects. The LinearLayout is the root view of
this hierarchy.
2. Android searches the View hierarchy for a View with a
matching ID.
We’re using findViewById<Button>
(R.id.start_button), so Android searches the view
hierarchy for a View whose ID is start_button.
3. Android returns the topmost View with this ID in the
hierarchy, and casts it to the type specified in the call to
findViewById().
Here, findViewById<Button>(R.id.start_button)
finds the first View in the hierarchy with an ID of
start_button, and casts it as a Button. MainActivity
can now interact with it.
So each time you use findViewById(), Android searches the layout’s
hiearchy for a View with a matching ID, and casts it to the specified type.
BRAIN POWER
Now that you’ve seen how findViewById() works, what
disadvantages can you see to its approach? What do you think could be
done differently?
There’s a downside to findViewById()
Even though findViewById() is a useful way of getting references to
views, it has several disadvantages.
It makes your code longer.
The more views you need to interact with, the more calls you need
to make. This can lead to longer code that’s harder to read.
It’s inefficient.
Each time you call findViewById(), Android has to search the
layout’s hierarchy for a view with a matching ID. This is
inefficient, particularly if your layout has many views in a deep
hierarchy.
It’s not null-safe.
findViewById() is used to search for a view at runtime, which
means the compiler can’t check for common errors.
It’s possible, for instance, to pass findViewById() an invalid
ID: one that doesn’t exist in the layout. If you try using:
val message = view.findViewById<EditText>(R.id.message)
and the layout doesn’t include a View with an ID of message, a
null pointer exception will get thrown, and the app will crash.
It’s not type-safe.
Another problem is that the compiler can’t check that you’ve
specified the View’s type correctly, which can lead to a class cast
exception.
Imagine you have a radio group named pizza_group, and you
try to get a reference to it using this code:
val pizzaGroup = view.findViewById<ChipGroup>
(R.id.pizza_group)
Even though the ChipGroup type is specified instead of
RadioGroup, the code still compiles. The compiler doesn’t
check whether the type is correct when it builds the code. When
the app runs, it throws a class cast exception, and the app crashes.
So if findViewById() has these disadvantages, what’s the alternative?
View binding to the rescue
An alternative to calling findViewById() each time you need a View
reference is to use view binding. With view binding, you set up a binding
object (which you’ll find out more about later) and use this to access each
view.
As an example, suppose you have a layout that includes a button with an ID
of start_button. If you wanted to make it do something when clicked,
you could get a reference to it using findViewById() like this:
With view binding, you no longer need to call findViewById() to get a
reference to the button. Instead, you simply use the following:
This code does the same thing, but it’s simpler to write, and can make your
code shorter and easier to read.
View binding is safer and more efficient than
findViewById()
When you use view binding, Android no longer needs to search your
layout’s view hierarchy for a matching View: it simply uses the binding
object to access it. This makes it much more efficient than using
findViewById().
Another advantage is the compiler prevents null pointer and class cast
exceptions at compile time. As you access views using a binding object,
the compiler knows which views are available and their types. It won’t let
you reference a view that doesn’t exist, and you no longer have to cast it to
a specific type because the compiler already knows what this is. Your code
is much safer as a result.
Now that you know about the benefits of using view binding, let’s find out
how to use it.
View binding is a type-safe, more efficient alternative to calling
findViewById().
Here’s how we’ll use view binding
View binding code is slightly different for activities and fragments, so in
this chapter we’re going to show you the code for both. Here are the steps
we’ll go through:
1. Add view binding to the Stopwatch app’s activity code.
In Chapter 5, we built a Stopwatch app to teach you about
Android’s activity lifecycle methods. We’ll revisit this app, and
update its activity code so it uses view binding.
2. Add view binding to the Bits and Pizzas app’s fragment.
We’ll then go back to the Bits and Pizzas app we created in the
previous chapter and show you how to implement view binding in
its fragment code.
Let’s get started.
The Stopwatch app revisited
We’ll begin by changing up the Stopwatch app you created in Chapter 5, so
open the project for this app now.
As you may recall, the Stopwatch app displays a simple stopwatch that you
can start, pause, and reset with the help of three buttons. It looks like this:
The app uses a single activity—MainActivity—which has a layout file
named activity_main.xml.
Each time it needs to interact with one of its views, it calls
findViewById() to get a reference to it. To make its Start button
respond to clicks, for example, it uses code like this:
val startButton = findViewById<Button>(R.id.start_button)
startButton.setOnClickListener {
 //Code that runs when the button’s clicked
}
Let’s find out how to update the app so that it uses view binding instead.
Enable view binding in the app build.gradle
file
To use view binding, you first need to enable it in the android section of
the app’s build.gradle file. The code to enable view binding looks like this:
We’re going to use view binding in the Stopwatch app, so make sure that
you add the above change to the file Stopwatch/app/build.gradle. Then
choose the Sync Now option to sync this change with the rest of your
project.
NOTE
Remember to sync this change, or you’ll get errors in your code when you try to update
the activity code.
Enabling view binding generates code for each layout
When you enable view binding, it automatically creates a binding class for
each of the layout files in your app. The Stopwatch app, for example,
contains a layout file named activity_main.xml, so when you enable view
binding, it automatically generates a binding class named
ActivityMainBinding:
Each binding class includes a property for each view in the layout that has
an ID. The layout activity_main.xml, for example, includes a button with an
ID of start_button, so the binding class ActivityMainBinding
includes a property named startButton whose type is Button.
The binding classes are important because the layout’s views are bound to
the binding class properties. Instead of calling findViewById() each
time you need a view reference, you simply interact with that view’s
property in the binding class.
Now that we’ve enabled view binding in the Stopwatch app, let’s see how
to use it in the code for MainActivity.
How to add view binding to an activity
The code to make an activity use view binding is virtually identical for
every activity you create. It looks like this:
The above code declares a property named binding whose type is
ActivityMainBinding. This property gets set in the activity’s
onCreate() method using the following code:
This calls ActivityMainBinding’s inflate() method, which
creates an ActivityMainBinding object that’s linked to the activity’s
layout.
The code:
val view = binding.root
setContentView(view)
gets a reference to the binding object’s root view, and uses the
setContentView() method to display it.
Once you’ve added view binding to an activity in this way, you can use the
binding property to interact with the layout’s views. Let’s do this now.
Use the binding property to interact with
views
The current code for MainActivity interacts with its views in order to
control the stopwatch and make its buttons respond to clicks. We can update
this code so that instead of making calls to findViewById(), it accesses
the views using the activity’s binding property.
To see how this works, let’s use MainActivity’s Start button as an
example.
The layout code
The Start button is defined in activity_main.xml using this code:
As you can see, it has an ID of start_button.
The activity code
MainActivity makes the button respond to clicks using
findViewById() like so:
val startButton = findViewById<Button>(R.id.start_button)
startButton.setOnClickListener {
 //Code that runs when the button’s clicked
}
With view binding, we can change the code to:
The code does the same thing as the original code, but it uses
MainActivity’s binding property to interact with the button.
Let’s update the full code for MainActivity so it uses view binding.
The full code for MainActivity.kt
Here’s the updated code for MainActivity; update the code for
MainActivity.kt so that it includes the changes below (in bold):
Those are all the changes we need to make to the Stopwatch app to get it to
use view binding. Let’s run through what happens when the code runs, and
take it for a test drive.
What the code does
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. When the app launches, MainActivity gets created.
It includes an ActivityMainBinding property named
binding.
2. When MainActivity’s onCreate() method runs, it assigns an
ActivityMainBinding object to the binding property.
The binding property gets set in onCreate() because this is
when MainActivity first has access to views.
3. The ActivityMainBinding object includes a property for each
view in the layout with an ID.
The layout file activity_main.xml includes a button with an ID of
start_button, for example, so the ActivityMainBinding
object includes a Button property named startButton, which
provides access to this view.
4. MainActivity uses the binding property to access its views.
It specifies how the Start button should respond to clicks, for
example, by calling the startButton property’s
setOnClickListener() method.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, it works in the same way as it did before. When we
click on the Start button, the stopwatch starts, and it pauses and gets reset
when we click on the Pause and Reset buttons.
The difference, however, is that the MainActivity now uses view
binding to intract with its views instead of making calls to
findViewById().
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Why didn’t you cover view binding earlier in the book?
A: We wanted you to get more activity and fragment experience under
your belt before introducing you to view binding. View binding makes
some parts of the code a bit more complicated, and we felt it was
important for you to get used to the basics first.
Q: Is it possible to stop a binding class from being generated for a
particular layout file?
A: Yes. If you know that you won’t use view binding with a particular
layout, you can stop its binding class from being generated by adding to
its root view:
tools:viewBindingIgnore="true"
Activity Magnets
An activity named MainActivity uses the file activity_main.xml for its
layout. The layout includes a Button (with an ID of pow_button) and a
TextView {with an ID of pow_text). When clicked, the Button needs
to make the TextView display the text “Pow!”
Somebody used fridge magnets to write the MainActivity code, but a
freak kitchen sandstorm dislodged some of the magnets. Can you piece the
code back together again?
Fragments can use view binding too (but the
code’s a little different)
Now that you’ve learned how to implement view binding in your activity
code, lets find out how to use it in fragments. As we said earlier, the code
for fragments is slightly different to the code for activities.
Let’s implement view binding in the Bits and Pizzas app
We’ll explore how view binding for fragments works by changing up the
Bits and Pizzas app you created in Chapter 9. Open the project for this app
now.
As we’re sure you remember, the Bits and Pizzas app uses Material views
such as collapsing toolbars and FABs to provide an interactive UI for a
pizza app. The UI is defined by the app’s fragment, which is named
FragmentOrder.
The code for FragmentOrder includes many calls to
findViewById(). Let’s find out how to use view binding to replace
these.
Enable view binding for Bits and Pizzas
As before, to use view binding in the Bits and Pizzas project, you first need
to enable it in the app’s build.gradle file.
Open the file BitsandPizzas/app/build.gradle, and add the following lines to
the android section:
Then choose the Sync Now option to sync the change with the rest of your
project.
Binding classes are generated for every layout
Just as with the Stopwatch app, enabling view binding in the Bits and
Pizzas app automatically creates a binding class for each of the app’s layout
files. This app contains two layout files—activity_main.xml and
fragment_order.xml—so two binding classes are generated:
ActivityMainBinding and FragmentOrderBinding.
As before, each binding class includes a property for each view in its layout
with an ID. The layout fragment_order.xml, for example, includes a radio
group with an ID of pizza_group, so the binding class
FragmentOrderBinding includes a property named pizzaGroup
whose type is RadioGroup.
In the Bits and Pizzas app, the only code that interacts with views is in
OrderFragment.kt, so we only need to update this file in order to use view
binding.
Fragment view binding code is a little
different
As we said earlier, the view binding code you use in a fragment is slightly
different to the code you use in an activity. Before we show you what
fragment view binding code looks like, we’re going to dig a little deeper,
and show you why the code is different.
Activities can access views from onCreate()
As you already know, an activity first gets access to its layout when its
onCreate() method runs. This is the first method in the activity’s
lifecycle, and it’s used to inflate the layout (or bind to it with view binding)
and perform any initial setup. If a button needs to respond to clicks, for
example, the activity assigns an OnClickListener to it using code in
its onCreate() method.
The activity continues to have access to its layout until its onDestroy()
method has run. This is the final method in the activity’s lifecycle, and the
activity is destroyed after this method has finished running.
Because the activity has access to the views in its layout from
onCreate() to onDestroy(), it can interact with them in any of its
methods:
That’s what happens with activities, but for fragments the situation’s a little
different. Let’s see how.
Fragments can access views from
onCreateView() to onDestroyView()
As you know, a fragment first gets access to its layout when its
onCreateView() method runs. This gets called when an activity needs
access to the fragment’s layout, so it’s used to inflate the layout and perform
any initial setup such as setting OnClickListeners.
onCreateView(), however, isn’t the first method in the fragment’s
lifecycle. There are other methods, such as onCreate(), that run before
onCreateView(), so they can’t interact with the fragment’s views.
After its onCreateView() method has run, the fragment continues to
have access to its views until its onDestroyView() method has finished
running. This gets called when the activity no longer needs the fragment’s
layout, which may be because the activity needs to navigate to a different
fragment, or it’s being destroyed.
onDestroyView(), however, isn’t the final method in the fragment’s
lifecycle. There are other methods, such as onDestroy(), that run after
onDestroyView(), so these can’t interact with the fragment’s views
either:
An activity can interact with its views from onCreate() to onDestroy().
A fragment can only interact with its views from onCreateView() to
onDestroyView().
We’ll show you an overview of the fragment lifecycle on the next page, and
then see what fragment view binding code looks like.
FRAGMENT LIFECYCLE METHODS UP CLOSE
A fragment’s lifecycle is very similar to an activity’s, but it has a few
extra steps. Here’s when the main fragment lifecycle methods get
called, what you use them for, and how they fit in with the state of the
activity the fragment is displayed in:
What fragment view binding code looks like
You’re now ready to see what fragment view binding code is like. Just like
activities, you enable view binding in fragments by getting them to use a
binding property, but the way in which you do this is slightly different.
Here’s the code:
As you can see, the above code defines two extra properties: binding and
_binding. Let’s take a closer look at what these two properties do.
RELAX
View binding code for fragments looks virtually identical for every
fragment.
Once you’ve included these changes, you can replace any
findViewById() method calls as you did with activities.
_binding refers to the binding object…
As you’ve just seen, the view binding code for fragments defines a
_binding property like this:
Its type is FragmentOrderBinding?, and it’s initialized with null.
The _binding property is set to an instance of
FragmentOrderBinding in the fragment’s onCreateView()
method using this code:
It’s set in this method because it’s when the fragment first has access to its
views.
The _binding property is set back to null in the fragment’s
onDestroyView() method:
This is because the fragment can no longer access its views after its
onDestroyView() method gets called.
...and the binding property provides non-null access to it
The binding property uses a getter to return a non-null version of
_binding, and throws a null pointer exception if _binding is null:
private val binding get() = _binding!!
This means you can use the binding property to interact with the
fragment’s views without performing lots of messy null-safety checks. To
make a fragment’s FAB respond to clicks, for example, you simply use:
binding.fab.setOnClickListener {
 //Code that does something
}
Activities and fragments get access to their views at different points in
their lifecycles.
An activity can interact with its views from when it’s been created and its
onCreate() method is called. It continues to have access to these views
until the activity is destroyed, which happens at the end of its lifecycle.
A fragment, however, can only interact with its views from when its
onCreateView() method gets called. This means that the _binding
property can only be set to a view binding object in this method.
The fragment continues to have access to its views until its
onDestroyView() method runs. At this point, the fragment’s layout is
discarded, so _binding needs to be set to null. This prevents the fragment
from trying to use the view binding object when it can no longer interact
with views.
You now know everything that you need in order to use view binding with a
fragment, so let’s update the code for OrderFragment in the Bits and
Pizzas app.
The full code for OrderFragment.kt
Here’s the code to make OrderFragment use view binding; update the
code for OrderFragment.kt so it includes the changes shown here (in bold):
That’s all the code we need to make OrderFragment use view binding.
Let’s take the app for a test drive, and make sure that it still works.
Test Drive
When we run the app, it works in the same way as it did before.
When we click on the FAB without selecting a pizza type, a toast asks us to
choose a pizza.
When we select a pizza type and click on the FAB again, a snackbar
appears at the bottom of the screen showing us details of our order.
Congratulations! You now know how to implement view binding in your
activity and fragment code. We’ll continue to use view binding through the
rest of this book.
EXERCISE
The fragment code below makes a FAB (with an ID of fab) respond to
clicks. When clicked, a snackbar is displayed on the device screen. The
snackbar includes an action that displays a toast.
Can you update the fragment so that it uses view binding?
Answers in “ Exercise Solution”.
Activity Magnets Solution
An activity named MainActivity uses the file activity_main.xml for its
layout. The layout includes a Button (with an ID of pow_button) and a
TextView {with an ID of pow_text). When clicked, the Button needs
to make the TextView display the text “Pow!”
Somebody used fridge magnets to write the MainActivity code, but a
freak kitchen sandstorm dislodged some of the magnets. Can you piece the
code back together again?
EXERCISE SOLUTION
The fragment code below makes a FAB (with an ID of fab) respond to
clicks. When clicked, a snackbar is displayed on the device screen. The
snackbar includes an action that displays a toast.
Can you update the fragment so that it uses view binding?
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 10 under your belt and now you’ve added view
binding to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
View binding is a type-safe way of interacting with views. It’s
more efficient than using findViewById(), and less likely
to produce errors at runtime.
View binding can be used in activity and fragment code.
Enable view binding in the app’s build.gradle file.
View binding generates a binding class for each of the app’s
layout files.
Each binding class includes a property for each view in the
layout with an ID.
When you use view binding with an activity, you set its
binding property in the activity’s onCreate() method.
When you use view binding with a fragment, you set its
binding property in the fragment’s onCreateView()
method, and set it to null in onDestroyView().
Fragments have lifecycle methods that are linked to an
activity’s state.
Chapter 11. View Models: Model
Behavior
As apps grow more complex, fragments have more to juggle.
And if you’re not careful, this can lead to bloated code that tries to do
everything. Business logic, navigation, controlling the UI, dealing with
configuration changes…you name it, it’s in there. In this chapter, you’ll
learn how to deal with this kind of situation using view models. You’ll
discover how they simplify your activity and fragment code. You’ll find
out how they survive configuration changes, keeping your app’s state safe
and sound. Finally, we’ll show you how to build a view model factory, and
when this might be needed.
Configuration changes revisited
As you learned in Chapter 5, Bad Things can happen when you rotate the
screen while running an app. Changing the screen orientation is a
configuration change, which causes Android to destroy and recreate the
current activity. As a result, views and properties can lose their state and get
reset:
In Chapter 5, you learned how to handle this using the activity’s
onSaveInstanceState method. This method gets triggered before the
activity gets destroyed, and it’s used to save any values that may get lost in
a Bundle. When the activity gets recreated, you can use these saved values
to restore the state of the activity’s views and properties.
NOTE
Fragments have an onSaveInstanceState method too. Even though we’ve only shown
you how to use this approach with an activity, it works with fragments as well.
Using a Bundle to save state works well for relatively simple apps, but it’s
not an ideal solution for more complicated ones. This is because Bundles
are only intended to hold a small amount of data, and only work with a
limited number of types.
There are other problems, too
Another problem apps can have is that the activity and fragment code can
quickly become bloated. The code may need to control navigation, update
the UI, save state, and also include more general business logic to control
the app’s behavior. Having all of this in one place makes the code longer,
which can then be harder to read and maintain.
In this chapter we’re going to learn how to solve all of these problems using
a view model.
Introducing the view model
A view model is a separate class that sits alongside the activity or fragment
code. It’s responsible for all of the data that needs to be displayed on the
screen, along with any business logic. Whenever a fragment needs to update
its layout, it asks the view model for the latest values it needs to display,
and if it needs access to some business logic, it calls the methods held in the
view model.
Why use a view model?
There are a couple reasons why you might want to use a view model.
Using a view model simplifies your activity or fragment code. Your
fragment no longer needs to include code relating to the app’s business
logic as this is all held in a separate class. Instead, it can focus on things
like updating the screen or navigation.
Another reason is that the view model can survive configuration changes.
It doesn’t get destroyed when the user rotates the device screen, so the state
of any variables doesn’t get lost. This lets you restore the state of your app
without having having to store values in a Bundle.
We’re going to find out how to use view models by building a word
guessing game. Before we start writing the code, let’s go through how the
game will work.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: You said Bundles are only intended to hold a limited number of
data types. Does that mean there’s no way of adding extra types?
A: Technically, you can add extra types to a Bundle using an interface
named Parcelable. We’re not teaching you this approach because
we think it’s better to use a view model.
If you’re feeling curious, however, you can find out more about using
Parcelable in the Android documentation.
What the guessing game will do
The aim of the Guessing Game app is for the user to try and guess a secret
word.
When the game starts, it chooses a word at random from an array, and
displays a blank for each of the word’s letters:
The user suggests a letter that she thinks is in the secret word. If she guesses
correctly, the game displays the letter where it appears in the secret word. If
she guesses incorrectly, the game displays the incorrect guess, and she loses
a life.
The user continues to make guesses until she finds all of the letters, or runs
out of lives. When this happens, a new screen appears, telling her what the
secret word was, and whether she won or lost the game. She’s given the
option to start another game.
How the app will be structured
The app will contain a single activity (named MainActivity), which
will be used to display the game’s fragments: GameFragment and
ResultFragment.
GameFragment is the game’s main screen. It will display blanks for the
secret word’s letters, let the user make guesses, and show any wrong
choices and the number of lives left.
When the game is over, GameFragment will use the Navigation
component to navigate to ResultFragment, passing it a String for the
result. ResultFragment will display the String and a button to let the
user start a new game.
We’ll go into more details about how the app is structured when we build it.
First, let’s run through the steps we’ll take.
Here’s what we’re going to do
Here are the steps that we’ll go through to write the app:
1. Write the basic game.
We’ll create GameFragment and ResultFragment, write the
game logic, and use the Navigation component to navigate
between the two fragments.
2. Add a view model for GameFragment.
We’ll create a view model, GameViewModel, to hold
GameFragment’s game logic and data. This will simplify the
GameFragment code, and ensure that the game survives
configuration changes.
3. Add a view model for ResultFragment.
We’ll add a second view model, ResultViewModel, for
ResultFragment to use. This view model will hold the result
of the game that the user’s just played.
Create the Guessing Game project
We’re going to use a new project for the Guessing Game app, so create one
now using the same steps you used in the previous chapters. Choose the
Empty Activity option, enter a name of “Guessing Game” and a package
name of “com.hfad.guessinggame”, and accept the default save location.
Make sure the language is set to Kotlin and the minimum SDK is API 21 so
it will run on most Android devices.
The Guessing Game app will use view binding to reference its views, and
the Navigation component to navigate between its fragments. Let’s update
the project and app build.gradle files to include these libraries.
Update the project build.gradle file…
We’re going to add a new variable to the project’s build.gradle file to
specify which version of the Navigation component we’ll be using, along
with a Safe Args classpath.
Open the file GuessingGame/build.gradle, and add the following lines (in
bold) to the sections shown:
…and update the app build.gradle file too
In the app’s build.gradle file, we need to enable view binding, add a
dependency to the Navigation component library, and apply the Safe Args
plug-in so that we can pass arguments to fragments.
Open the file GuessingGame/app/build.gradle, and add the following lines
(in bold) to the appropriate sections:
Once you’ve made these changes, click on the Sync Now option to sync the
changes you’ve made with the rest of your project.
Next, we’ll create the app’s fragments.
The Guessing Game app has two fragments
The Guessing Game app requires two fragments: GameFragment and
ResultFragment. GameFragment is the app’s main screen, and
ResultFragment will be used to display the result:
Let’s go ahead and add the two fragments to the project.
Create GameFragment…
We’ll add GameFragment to the project first.
Highlight the com.hfad.guessinggame package in the app/src/main/java
folder, then go to File→New→Fragment→Fragment (Blank). Name the
fragment “GameFragment”, name its layout “fragment_game”, and make
sure the language is set to Kotlin.
NOTE
Don’t worry about the code for these fragments just yet. We’ll update them after we’ve
added them to a navigation graph.
…and then create ResultFragment
Next, add ResultFragment by highlighting the com.hfad.guessinggame
package in the app/src/main/java folder again, and choosing
File→New→Fragment→Fragment (Blank). This time, name the fragment
“ResultFragment”, name its layout “fragment_result”, and make sure the
language is set to Kotlin.
NOTE
Don’t worry about the code for these fragments just yet. We’ll update them after we’ve
added them to a navigation graph.
We’ll update the code for these two fragments a few pages ahead. Before
that, we’ll add a navigation graph to the project, which will tell the app how
to navigate between the two fragments.
How navigation should work
As you know, a navigation graph tells Android about an app’s possible
destinations, and how to navigate to them.
In the Guessing Game app, we want navigation to work as follows:
1. When the app gets launched, display GameFragment.
2. When a game is won or lost, GameFragment navigates to
ResultFragment, passing it the result.
3. When the user clicks on the New Game button, navigate to
GameFragment.
To implement this, we’ll add GameFragment and ResultFragment to
a new navigation graph (which we’ll create), and specify that each fragment
can navigate to the other.
We’ll also say that GameFragment will pass a String argument to
ResultFragment, specifying a message that indicates whether the user
has won or lost the game they’ve just played. ResultFragment will
display this message when it’s navigated to.
Create the navigation graph
To create the navigation graph, select the GuessingGame/app/src/main/res
folder in the project explorer, and then choose File→New→Android
Resource File. When prompted, enter a file name of “nav_graph”, choose a
resource type of “Navigation”, and click on OK. This creates a navigation
graph named nav_graph.xml.
We need to update the navigation graph to include GameFragment and
ResultFragment, along with navigation actions for each one. We’ll do
this next.
The navigation graph holds details of all the app’s possible
destinations, and how to get to them.
Update the navigation graph
To update the navigation graph, open the file nav_graph.xml (if it’s not
already open), switch to the Code view, and update its code to include the
changes shown here (in bold):
Now that you’ve updated the navigation graph, let’s link it to
MainActivity so that it displays each fragment when we navigate to it.
Display the current fragment in
MainActivity’s layout
To display each fragment, we need to add a navigation host to
MainActivity’s layout that’s linked to the navigation graph we just
created. We’ll do this using a FragmentContainerView, just as we did
in previous chapters.
You’re already familiar with the code to do this, so update
activity_main.xml so that it matches the code below:
When you’ve updated the layout, open MainActivity.kt and make sure it
matches the code shown here:
That’s everything we need for MainActivity. Next, let’s update the
code for the two fragments, starting with GameFragment.
Update GameFragment’s layout
GameFragment is the app’s main screen, and it’s what the user will use to
play the guessing game. We need to add several views to its layout to
enable this: three text views for the word to guess, the number of lives left
and the incorrect guesses that have been made, an edit text for typing
guesses into, and a button to make the guess.
Add these views to the layout by updating the code in fragment_game.xml
so it matches the code shown below:
That’s everything we need to include in GameFragment’s layout. Next,
let’s tell the game how to behave by updating its Kotlin code.
What GameFragment needs to do
In the first version of the app, GameFragment.kt needs to include all of the
code that’s needed to play the game, as well as updating the screen and
enabling navigation. It needs to:
Choose a word at random.
We’ll provide it with a list of possible words to choose from.
Let the user guess a letter.
Respond to the guess.
If the user guesses correctly, GameFragment needs to add the
letter to a list of correct guesses, and show where the letter appears
in the word. If the guess is incorrect, it needs to add the guess to a
String of incorrect guesses, and decrement the number of lives
left.
Navigate to ResultFragment when the game is over.
All of this code is pure Kotlin, or Android code that you’ve seen before.
We’ll show you the full code over the next few pages.
The GameFragment.kt code
Here’s the code for GameFragment; update the code in GameFragment.kt
so that it matches the code shown below:
That’s all the code that we need for GameFragment. Next, let’s write the
ResultFragment code.
Update ResultFragment’s layout
ResultFragment uses a text view to tell the user whether she’s won or
lost the game she’s just played, and a button to let her start another game.
We need to add both of these views to the fragment’s layout.
You’re already familiar with the code to do this, so open
fragment_result.xml, and update it so that it matches the code shown below:
We also need to update ResultFragment.kt
Once we’ve added the text view and button to ResultFragment’s
layout, we need to specify their behavior in the fragment’s Kotlin code.
We’ll update the text view’s text with the result, and we’ll also make the
button navigate back to GameFragment when it’s clicked.
We’ll show you the code for ResultFragment.kt on the next page.
The ResultFragment.kt code
Here’s the code for ResultFragment; update ResultFragment.kt so it
matches the code below:
That’s all the code that we need for this version of the Guessing Game app.
Let’s go through what happens when the code runs, and take the app for a
test drive.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. The app is launched and GameFragment is displayed in
MainActivity.
GameFragment sets livesLeft to 8, correctGuesses and
incorrectGuesses to "", secretWord to a word it chooses
at random, and secretWordDisplay to the value of
deriveSecretWordDisplay(). It then calls its
updateScreen() method, which displays the values of
livesLeft, incorrectGuesses, and
secretWordDisplay.
2. When the user makes a guess, GameFragment calls its
makeGuess() method.
The method checks if secretWord contains the letter the user
has guessed. If it does, makeGuess() adds the letter to
correctGuesses and updates secretWordDisplay. If it
doesn’t, the method adds the letter to incorrectGuesses, and
subtracts 1 from livesLeft. It then calls updateScreen()
again so that the new values are displayed.
3. After each guess, GameFragment checks if isWon() or isLost()
is true.
These methods check if the user has guessed all the letters in the
word, or if she has run out of lives. If either method returns true,
GameFragment passes the result to ResultFragment, which
displays the result.
Test Drive
When we run the app, GameFragment is displayed. It shows how many
letters the secret word has, and how many lives we have.
We can make a guess by entering a letter in the edit text, and clicking the
button. If we guess correctly, it places the letter in the secret word, but if we
get it wrong, we lose a life.
If we guess all the letters or run out of lives, a message telling us whether
we’ve won or lost is displayed in ResultFragment.
The game seems to work, but what happens if we rotate the screen?
The game loses state when the screen
rotates
There’s a problem with the game, however. If we rotate the screen when
we’re in the middle of a game, the app loses its state and the game starts
from the beginning.
The game loses its state because rotating the screen changes the app’s
configuration, so Android destroys the activity (and the fragment it
displays) and immediately recreates it. This resets the game’s views and
properties.
We could solve this problem using the fragment’s
onSaveInstanceState method to save the state of any properties, as
we did earlier in the book. This time, however, we’re going to fix it by
implementing a view model instead.
A view model holds business logic
As we said earlier, a view model is a separate class that sits alongside your
activity or fragment code. It’s responsible for the data that needs to be
displayed on the screen along with any business logic. In our Guessing
Game app, for example, this means that the view model needs to hold the
game’s properties—like the secret word the user needs to guess, and the
number of lives left—and any methods that control how the game is played.
When you implement a view model, all of the code relating to the app’s
data or business logic is moved out of the activity or fragment, and into the
view model. Any code that controls the UI—such as displaying text, or
getting user input—stays in the activity or fragment code.
This way of architecting Android apps follows a design principle known as
separation of concerns. The app is split into different classes, where each
class addresses a separate concern. A UI controller—the activity or
fragment code—handles the UI, and the view model is responsible for the
business logic and data:
Use a view model to simplify your activity and fragment code, and hold
the state of any properties so that they survive configuration changes.
Using this sort of app architecture has two key advantages.
It simplifies your activity and fragment code.
Moving the app’s data and business logic into a view model means
that there’s less activity and fragment code for you to maintain.
Your app survives configuration changes.
The view model is a separate class that sits alongside your activity
or fragment code. It’s not destroyed when you rotate the device
screen, so the state of any properties held in the view model
survives configuration changes without you having to add their
values to a Bundle.
Now that you’ve learned what using a view model buys you, let’s see how
to add one to the Guessing Game app.
Add a view model dependency to the app
build.gradle file…
The view model library is part of Android Jetpack, so you need to update
the app’s build.gradle file to include it as a dependency.
Open the file GuessingGame/app/build.gradle, and add the following line
(in bold) to the dependencies section:
When prompted, sync your changes. You’re now ready to go ahead and
create a view model.
…and create a view model
We’re going to create a view model named GameViewModel, which
GameFragment will use for its game logic and data.
Select the com.hfad.guessinggame package in the app/src/main/java folder,
then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File. Name the file
“GameViewModel” and choose the option to create a class.
When the GameViewModel.kt file has been created, update its code to
match the code below (the changes are in bold):
As you can see, the GameViewModel class extends
androidx.lifecycle.ViewModel. ViewModel is an abstract class
that’s used to turn a plain old class into a card-carrying view model.
Now that we’ve added GameViewModel to the Guessing Game project
and turned it into a view model, let’s write the rest of its code.
The full code for GameViewModel.kt
As you’ve already learned, the view model is responsible for an activity or
fragment’s business logic and data. For the Guessing Game app, this means
that we need to take all of GameFragment’s properties and methods that
relate to how the game is played, and move them into GameViewModel.
We’ll leave any code relating to navigation or the UI in GameFragment.
Here’s the full code for GameViewModel.kt; update the code to include the
changes (in bold):
That’s everything that we need for GameViewModel. Next, let’s link it to
GameFragment, and update the code for that fragment.
Create a GameViewModel object
To link a view model to an activity or fragment, you need to add a
ViewModel property to the code, and initialize it with a ViewModel
object, which you need to create. The code looks like this:
As you can see, the above code uses a view model provider to create the
ViewModel object. So what does using this class do?
Use a ViewModelProvider to create view models
As its name suggests, ViewModelProvider is a special class whose job
is to provide activities and fragments with view models. It ensures that a
new view model object only gets created if one doesn’t already exist.
As you already know, when the screen is rotated, any fragments that are
displayed on the screen get destroyed and recreated. When this happens, the
view model provider makes sure that the same view model object continues
to be used. The view model keeps its state, so any properties that are used
by the fragment don’t get reset.
The view model provider keeps hold of the view model so long as the
activity or fragment stays alive. When a fragment is detached or removed
from its activity, for example, the view model provider lets go of the
fragment’s view model. The next time the view model provider is asked to
provide a view model object, it creates a new one.
Now that you’ve learned how to link a view model to a fragment, let’s
update the GameFragment code.
The updated code for GameFragment.kt
We need to remove the properties and methods from GameFragment that
we moved to GameViewModel, and make the fragment use the view
model instead.
Here’s the updated code for GameFragment; make sure that the file
GameFragment.kt includes the changes shown below (in bold):
Those are all the changes that we need to make to GameFragment. Let’s
go through what the code does when it runs, and take it for a test drive.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. GameFragment asks the ViewModelProvider class for an
instance of GameViewModel.
The view model provider sees that there’s no existing
GameViewModel object associated with the fragment, so it
creates a new one.
2. The GameViewModel object is initialized.
It sets livesLeft to 8, correctGuesses and
incorrectGuesses to "", secretWord to a word it chooses
at random, and secretWordDisplay to
deriveSecretWordDisplay().
3. GameFragment calls its updateScreen() method.
The method accesses the GameViewModel object’s
secretWordDisplay, livesLeft, and
incorrectGueses properties, and shows them on the screen.
4. When the user makes a guess, GameFragment calls the
GameViewModel object’s makeGuess() method.
The method checks if secretWord contains the letter the user
guesses. If it does, it adds the letter to correctGuesses and
updates secretWordDisplay. If it doesn’t, it adds it to
incorrectGuesses, and subtracts 1 from livesLeft.
5. GameFragment calls its updateScreen() method again.
The method gets the updated property values from the
GameViewModel object, and updates the screen.
6. After each guess, GameFragment checks if the view model’s
isWon() or isLost() methods return true.
If either method returns true, GameFragment passes the result to
ResultFragment, which displays the result.
Test Drive
When we run the app, GameFragment is displayed as before. If we start
playing the game and rotate the screen, the game retains its state.
You’ve now learned how to add a view model to your apps, and used it to
avoid the problems that can occur when the user rotates the device screen.
Before we go any further, let’s take a closer look at view models.
VIEW MODELS UP CLOSE
A view model is a separate class you write that’s responsible for a UI
controller’s business logic and data. It extends the
androidx.lifecycle.ViewModel class, and may optionally
override a method named onCleared(). This method gets called just
before the view model gets cleared away, and it gives you a chance to
dispose of any resources:
NOTE
The UI controller can be an activity or fragment.
import androidx.lifecycle.ViewModel
class MyViewModel : ViewModel() {
 //Code to initialize the view model
 override fun onCleared() {
 //Code that runs when the view model is about to get
cleared away
 }
}
You create a view model object using the ViewModelProvider
class, for example:
viewModel =
ViewModelProvider(this).get(MyViewModel::class.java)
This creates a view model in the same scope as the UI controller. It
ensures that a fresh view model only gets created if there’s not an
existing one in the UI controller’s scope. This means that the view
model survives configuration changes, so you don’t have to save the
state of any instance variables in a separate Bundle.
The view model stays alive until its UI controller permanently goes
away. If it’s linked to an activity, this is when the activity has finished:
when it’s been destroyed and won’t be recreated. If it’s linked to a
fragment, it’s when the fragment has been removed or detached from its
parent activity.
You can track when a view model has been created or cleared away
using the android.util.Log class. This class lets you add
messages to Android’s log (or logcat) that you can examine in Android
Studio. The following code, for example, logs a message when the view
model is cleared:
The Log class includes several methods you can use to log different
types of message. The Log.i() method lets you log information, for
example, while Log.e() is used for recording errors.
Here is a list of the different Log methods you can use, and what
they’re used for:
Log.v(String tag, String message) Logs a verbose message.
Log.d(String tag, String message) Logs a debug message.
Log.i(String tag, String message) Logs an information message.
Log.w(String tag, String message) Logs a warning message.
Log.e(String tag, String message) Logs an error message.
NOTE
There’s also a Log.wtf() method you can use to report conditions that should
never happen. According to the Android documentation, wtf means “What a
Terrible Failure.” We know it really means “Welcome to Fiskidagurinn,” which
refers to the Great Fish Day festival held annually in Dalvik, Iceland. Android
developers can often be heard to say, “My virtual device just took 8 minutes to
boot up. WTF??” as a tribute to the small town that gave its name to the standard
Android executable bytecode format.
Each message is composed of a String tag you use to identify the
source of the message, and the message itself. So the code:
Log.i("MyViewModel", "ViewModel cleared")
logs an information message that’s come from MyViewModel.
You can view the logcat in Android Studio by choosing the Logcat
option at the bottom of the screen. This lets you filter by the different
types of message, and search for text:
BE the View Model
The code below describes a view model class named MyViewModel.
Your job is to play like you’re the view model, and say what problems
there are with this code and how they could be fixed.
package com.hfad.myapp
import androidx.lifecycle.ViewModel
import android.util.Log
import android.widget.TextView
class MyViewModel {
 val num = 2
 init {
 Log.i("MyViewModel", "ViewModel created")
 }
 override fun onCleared() {
 Log.i("MyViewModel", "ViewModel cleared")
 }
 fun calculation(val1: Int, val2: Int): Int {
 Log.i("MyViewModel", "Called Calculation")
 return (val1 + val2) * num
 }
 fun joinTogether(text1: TextView, text2: TextView): String {
 Log.i("MyViewModel", "Called JoinTogether")
 return ("${text1.text} ${text2.text}")
 }
}
Answers in “BE the View Model Solution”.
We’ve added a view model for
GameFragment
So far, we’ve updated the Guessing Game app so that GameFragment
uses a view model named GameViewModel, which is responsible for all
of the fragment’s business logic and data. Using a view model in this way
simplifies the code in GameFragment.kt, and means that the app doesn’t
lose its state when the screen is rotated.
ResultFragment needs a view model too
Each view model you create is associated with a single UI controller—an
activity or fragment. This means that if we want ResultFragment to use
a view model too, we need to create a new one for this fragment.
Let’s do this now. Highlight the com.hfad.guessinggame package in the
app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File. Name
the file “ResultViewModel” and choose the option to create a class.
When the ResultViewModel.kt file has been created, update its code to
match ours below (our changes are in bold):
That’s the basic code you need to define a view model. So what other code
do we need to add?
ResultViewModel needs to hold the result
As you may recall, ResultFragment displays a message in its layout
that tells the user whether they’ve won or lost the game they’ve just played.
This message is passed to ResultFragment by GameFragment when
the game is over.
In the new version of the app, ResultViewModel is responsible for
ResultFragment’s game logic and data, so we need to add a property to
ResultViewModel to store the result. We’ll also use a String
constructor to make sure this property gets set as soon as
ResultViewModel gets created.
Here’s the full code for ResultViewModel.kt; update its code to include the
changes below (in bold):
Next, we’ll update ResultFragment so that it uses the new view model.
We need to link ResultViewModel to ResultFragment
Earlier, we were able to add a GameViewModel reference to
GameFragment using this code:
This tells the view model provider to get the GameViewModel object
that’s linked to the fragment, or create a new one if it doesn’t already exist.
The above approach, however, can’t be used to add a ResultViewModel
reference to ResultFragment. This is because it only works for view
models with a no argument constructor.
The code worked for GameViewModel because we could construct it
without passing any arguments. The constructor for the
ResultViewModel class, however, requires a String, so the above
code won’t work.
A view model factory creates view models
An alternative way of creating a view model is to pass the view model
provider a view model factory: a separate class whose sole purpose is to
create and initialize view models. This approach means that the view model
provider doesn’t have to worry about creating a view model by itself.
Instead, it uses the view model factory.
While view model factories can be used for any sort of view model, they’re
mostly used for ones whose constructors require arguments. This is because
the view model provider can’t pass arguments to the constructor by itself: it
needs a view model factory to do so.
Here’s how the view model factory will be used in the Guessing Game app:
Use a view model factory to create a view model that doesn’t have a noargument constructor.
1. We’ll define a class named ResultViewModelFactory, which
ResultFragment will use to create a factory object.
2. ResultFragment will tell the view model provider to use the
factory object.
3. When the view model provider needs a new ResultViewModel
object, it will use the ResultViewModelFactory.
Let’s go ahead and add a factory class to the Guessing Game app.
Create the ResultViewModelFactory class
We’re going to add a view model factory class named
ResultViewModelFactory to the Guessing Game app. This class will
be used by the view model provider to create a ResultViewModel
object.
To create the class, highlight the com.hfad.guessinggame package in the
app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File. Name
the file “ResultViewModelFactory” and choose the option to create a class.
When the ResultViewModelFactory.kt file has been created, update its code
to match ours below (our changes are in bold):
As you can see, the ResultViewModelFactory class implements an
interface named ViewModelProvider.Factory, and overrides its
create() method. This turns the class into a view model factory, which
the view model provider can use to create a ResultViewModel object.
The above code is everything we need for ResultViewModelFactory.
Let’s find out how to use it in our ResultFragment code.
RELAX
All view model factory code is nearly identical.
Don’t worry too much about the code details. All you really need to
know is it creates a view model of a particular type, and passes an
argument to its constructor.
Use the factory to create the view model
As we said earlier, you use a view model factory to create a view model by
passing the factory to the view model provider. The view model provider
decides when a new view model object is required, and when necessary,
uses the factory to create one.
The code to make the view model provider use a view model factory is
virtually identical for every view model you want to create. It looks like
this:
As you can see, the above code defines two properties: viewModel and
viewModelFactory. These are set in the fragment’s
onCreateView() method.
In onCreateView(), the code uses the result String that’s passed to it
from GameFragment to create a new ResultViewModelFactory
object. It passes the factory to the view model provider, which uses it to get
a ResultViewModel object.
Now that you know how to use a factory to link a view model to a
fragment, let’s update the ResultFragment code.
The updated code for ResultFragment.kt
Here’s the full code for ResultFragment, so update the code in file
ResultFragment.kt so it includes the changes shown below (in bold):
Those are all the changes that we need to make to ResultFragment.
After some questions, we’ll go through what happens when the app runs.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Does ResultFragment really need its own view model?
A: We decided to use one so that we could separate out any game logic
and data required by ResultFragment. This is only a result
String in the current app, but it’s good practice in case the app gets
more complicated. And let’s face it, it was a good excuse for us to teach
you about using view model factories.
Q: Why didn’t we use a factory when we created
GameViewModel?
A: Factories are only necessary when you need to create a view model
that doesn’t have a no-arguments constructor. As GameViewModel
uses the default constructor which has no arguments, we didn’t need to
use a factory.
Q: Could we still have used a factory for GameViewModel if we’d
wanted to?
A: Yes. You can use factories to create any sort of view model, but if
the view model has a no-argument constructor, you don’t need to use
one.
Q: Why did we need to add a constructor to ResultViewModel?
A: So that we could set the result String as soon as the view model
was created. This guarantees that the result String has a value
whenever ResultFragment uses the view model.
Q: Do you have to create view models using the
ViewModelProvider class? What happens if you don’t?
A: Yes, you should always use the view model provider to create a view
model object. The view model provider only creates a new view model
object if one doesn’t already exist for the UI controller’s scope, which
means that the view model survives configuration changes.
If you instantiate a view model without using the view model provider,
it will get recreated each time the UI controller is destroyed and
recreated. The view model would lose its state each time the device
screen is rotated.
Q: Can you unit test view models?
A: Yes! View models don’t refer to any of the screen’s views, so they
can be unit tested independently of activities and fragments. You don’t
have to run the app to test them.
Q: Why didn’t we create a view model for MainActivity?
A: In the Guessing Game app, MainActivity is only used to display
the game’s fragments. As MainActivity doesn’t include any game
logic or data, we didn’t need to create a view model for it.
Q: Can two fragments share the same view model?
A: If you have two fragments in an activity that need to communicate
with each other, you might want to add a single view model to the
activity that the two fragments then have access to. You can find out
more about this here:
https://developer.android.com/topic/libraries/architecture/viewmodel
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. GameFragment asks the ViewModelProvider class for an
instance of GameViewModel.
The GameViewModel object is initialized, and chooses a word at
random.
2. GameFragment interacts with the GameViewModel object.
The GameViewModel object records any guesses the user has
made, and keeps track of the number of lives left.
3. After each guess, GameFragment checks if the view model’s
isWon() or isLost() methods return true.
If either method is true, GameFragment navigates to
ResultFragment, passing it the result.
4. ResultFragment creates a ResultViewModelFactory object,
passing it the result String.
5. ResultFragment asks the ViewModelProvider class for an
instance of ResultViewModel.
The ViewModelProvider class sees that there’s no existing
ResultViewModel object, so it uses the
ResultViewModelFactory to create one. The
ResultViewModel object’s result property is initialized
with the result String.
6. ResultFragment gets the result String from the
ResultViewModel object, and displays it on the screen.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, GameFragment is displayed as before.
If we guess all the letters or lose all our lives, the app navigates to
ResultFragment. A message is displayed telling us whether we won or
lost, and what the secret word was.
The game behaves in the same way as it did before, but behind the scenes,
it’s now using view models for its game logic and data.
View Model Magnets
Here’s the code to define a view model named GiftViewModel:
import androidx.lifecycle.ViewModel
class GiftViewModel(budgetFrom: Int, budgetTo: Int) : ViewModel()
{
 val from = budgetFrom
 val to = budgetTo
}
See if you can piece together the code for the view model factory class that
will be used to create GiftViewModel objects.
View Model Magnets Solution
Here’s the code to define a view model named GiftViewModel:
import androidx.lifecycle.ViewModel
class GiftViewModel(budgetFrom: Int, budgetTo: Int) : ViewModel()
{
 val from = budgetFrom
 val to = budgetTo
}
See if you can piece together the code for the view model factory class that
will be used to create GiftViewModel objects.
BE the View Model Solution
The code below describes a view model class named MyViewModel.
Your job is to play like you’re the view model, and say what problems
there are with this code and how they could be fixed.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 11 under your belt and now you’ve added view
models to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
A view model simplifies your activity or fragment code by
separating out any code relating to its business logic and data.
View models can survive configuration changes.
A view model is usually associated with a single UI controller.
The view model extends the class
androidx.lifecycle.ViewModel.
Create a view model by calling the ViewModelProvider
class get() method. This ensures that a view model is only
created where one doesn’t already exist.
A view model stays alive until its UI controller permanently
goes away. This is when the activity is finished, or the
fragment is removed from its activity.
If a view model’s constructor requires arguments, you need to
write an additional factory class for it. The
ViewModelProvider class uses the factory each time it
needs to create an instance of the view model.
The view model factory class must implement an interface
named ViewModelProvider.Factory.
Chapter 12. Live Data: Leaping
into Action
Your code often needs to react to property value changes.
If a view model property changes value, for example, the fragment might
need to respond by updating its views or navigating elsewhere. But how
does a fragment get to hear when a property’s been updated? Here,
we’ll introduce you to live data: a way of telling interested parties when
something’s changed. You’ll learn all about MutableLiveData, and how to
make your fragment observe properties of this type. You’ll discover how
the LiveData type helps maintain your app’s integrity. Soon, you’ll be
writing apps that are more responsive than ever before...
The Guessing Game app revisited
In the previous chapter, we built a Guessing Game app that lets the user
guess which letters are included in a secret word. When the user guesses all
the letters or runs out of lives, the game ends.
To stop the fragment code from becoming too bloated and maintain the
app’s state when the user rotated the device screen, we used view models
for the app’s game logic and data. GameFragment uses
GameViewModel for its logic and data, and ResultViewModel holds
the game result that’s needed by ResultFragment:
When each fragment is displayed, or the user makes a guess, the fragments
get the latest values from their view models and display them on the screen.
While this approach works, however, there are some disadvantages.
The fragments decide when to update views
The downside to this approach is that each fragment decides when to fetch
the latest property values from the view model and update its views. And
some of the time, these values won’t have changed. If the user makes a
correct guess, for example, GameFragment updates the text that’s
displayed for the number of lives left and the incorrect guesses, even though
these values won’t have changed.
Let the view model say when a value’s changed
An alternative approach is for GameViewModel to let GameFragment
know when each of its properties has been updated. If the fragment is
notified of these changes, it will no longer need to decide for itself when to
fetch the latest property values from the view model and update its views.
Instead, it will only need to update its views once it’s told that the
underlying property has been updated.
We’re going to implement this change in the Guessing Game app using
Android’s live data library: part of Android Jetpack. Live data lets the view
model tell interested parties—such as fragments and activities—when its
property values have been updated. They can then react to these changes by
updating views, or calling other methods.
You’ll find out how to use live data through the rest of this chapter. First,
let’s go through the steps we’ll take to update the app.
Here’s what we’re going to do
Here are the steps that we’ll go through to write the app:
1. Make the Guessing Game app use live data.
We’ll update GameViewModel so that the livesLeft,
incorrectGuesses, and secretWordDisplay properties
use live data. We’ll then make GameFragment update its views
when the values of these properties change.
2. Protect GameViewModel’s properties and methods.
We’ll restrict access to GameViewModel’s properties so that only
GameViewModel can update them. We’ll also make sure that
GameFragment only has access to the methods it requires to do
its job.
3. Add a gameOver property.
We’ll make GameViewModel decide when each game is over
using a new gameOver property. GameFragment will navigate
to ResultFragment when the value of this property changes.
Add a live data dependency to the app build.gradle file
As we’re going to be using live data, we’ll begin by adding a live data
dependency to the app’s build.gradle file.
Open the project for the Guessing Game app (if you haven’t already done
so), open the file GuessingGame/app/build.gradle, and add the following
line (in bold) to the dependencies section:
When prompted, sync your changes.
GameViewModel and GameFragment need to
use live data
We want to use live data in the Guessing Game app so that
GameViewModel notifies GameFragment when its property values
have changed. GameFragment will then react to these changes.
We’ll tackle this in two stages:
1. Specify which GameViewModel property changes
GameFragment needs to know about.
2. Tell GameFragment how to respond to each change.
For now, we’ll focus on the GameViewModel code changes.
Which view model properties should use live data?
GameViewModel includes three properties—secretWordDisplay,
incorrectGuesses, and livesLeft—that GameFragment uses to
update its views. We’ll specify that these three properties use live data so
that GameFragment is notified when their values change.
You specify that a property uses live data by changing its type to
MutableLiveData<Type>, where Type is the type of data the
property should hold. The livesLeft property, for example, is currently
defined as an Int using the code:
var livesLeft = 8
To make the property use live data, you change its type to
MutableLiveData<Int> so that it looks like this instead:
This specifies that livesLeft is now a MutableLiveData<Int>
with an initial value of 8.
Similarly, we can define the incorrectGuesses and
secretWordDisplay properties using code like this
Here, each property’s type is set to MutableLiveData<String>.
incorrectGuesses’s value is set to "", while
secretWordDisplay’s value will get set in GameViewModel’s init
block.
So that’s how you define a live data property. Next up, how to update its
value.
Live data objects use a value property
When you use MutableLiveData properties, you update their values
using a property named value. To update the secretWordDisplay
property with the deriveSecretWordDisplay() method’s return
value, for example, you don’t use the code:
secretWordDisplay = deriveSecretWordDisplay()
as you did before. You use the following code instead:
secretWordDisplay.value = deriveSecretWordDisplay()
Changing the value property in this way is important, because it’s how
any interested parties—in this case GameFragment—get notified of any
changes. Each time secretWordDisplay’s value property gets
updated, GameFragment is informed, so it can respond by updating its
views.
The value property can be null
There’s one extra thing to be aware of when you use live data: the value’s
type is nullable. This means that when you use live data values in your
code, you need to perform null-safety checks, or your code won’t compile.
As an example, the livesLeft property is defined using the code:
This property’s type is MutableLiveData<Int>, so its value
property can accept an Int, or be null.
As the value property may be null, we can’t, say subtract one from its
value using the code:
livesLeft.value--
Instead, we need to use:
which subtracts 1 from its value so long as it isn’t null.
Similarly, the following isLost() method won’t compile because
liveLeft.value may be null:
fun isLost() = livesLeft.value <= 0
We can, however, change it to use Kotlin’s Elvis operator like this:
Live Data properties can be defined using val.
As you already know, you use val and var in Kotlin to specify whether or
not a property can be given a reference to a new object.
When we first defined each property, we used var so that we could update
it. We defined the livesLeft property, for example, using:
var livesLeft = 8
which initialized livesLeft with an Int object whose value is 8. Each
time the user made an incorrect guess, we subtracted 1 from livesLeft,
which gave it a reference to a new Int object:
With live data, you update the value property of the existing object,
instead of replacing it with another object, and interested parties are notified
of this change. As the object is no longer being replaced, you can define the
property using val instead of var like this:
The full code for GameViewModel.kt
Now that you know how live data works, let’s update GameViewModel so
that its livesLeft, incorrectGuesses, and
secretWordDisplay properties all use live data.
Here’s the full code for GameViewModel.kt; update the code to include the
changes (in bold):
That’s everything that we need for GameViewModel. Next up, let’s make
GameFragment respond when the livesLeft, incorrectGuesses,
and secretWordDisplay properties get updated.
The fragment observes the view model
properties and reacts to changes.
You make a fragment respond to value changes in a view model’s
MutableLiveData property by calling the property’s observe()
method. If the following code is added to GameFragment, for example, it
will observe the view model’s livesLeft property, and take action when
it changes:
As you can see, the above code passes viewLifecycleOwner and
Observer arguments to the observe() method.
viewLifecycleOwner refers to the lifecycle of the fragment’s views.
It’s tied to when the fragment has access to its UI: from when it’s created in
the fragment’s onCreateView() method, to when its destroyed, and
onDestroyView() gets called.
Observer is a class that can receive live data. It’s tied to the
viewLifecycleOwner, so it’s only active—and able to receive live data
notifications—when the fragment has access to its views. If the live data
property’s value changes while the fragment doesn’t have access to its UI,
the observer isn’t notified, so the fragment doesn’t respond. This stops the
fragment from trying to update views when they’re not available, which
might cause the app to crash.
NOTE
It also makes your coding life easier because you don’t need to check whether the
view’s available for yourself. Using live data handles it all for you.
The Observer class accepts a lambda parameter, which specifies how the
property’s new value should be used. In the Guessing Game app, for
example, we want GameFragment to update its lives text each time the
view model’s livesLeft property gets updated, and we can achieve this
using the following code:
That’s everything that we need to know in order to make GameFragment
update its views when the view model property values get changed. Let’s
update its code.
The full code for GameFragment.kt
Here’s the updated code for GameFragment; make sure that the file
GameFragment.kt includes the changes shown below (in bold):
Those are all the changes we need to make to GameFragment so that it
updates its views each time it observes changes to the
incorrectGuesses, livesLeft, and secretWordDisplay
properties.
We’ve now implemented live data in the Guessing Game app Let’s go
through what happens when the app runs.
ResultViewModel doesn’t need to use live data, so we don’t need to
update it.
As you may recall, ResultViewModel has one property (named
result), which gets set when the view model gets created. The code
looks like this:
class ResultViewModel(finalResult: String) : ViewModel(){
 val result = finalResult
}
As you can see, result is defined using val, so once it’s been initialized, it
can’t be updated to another value. ResultFragment doesn’t need to be
notified when result changes because once set, result can never
change. There’s no need to make ResultFragment respond to any
changes, because there can’t be any.
So let’s walk through what happens when the code runs, and then take the
app for a test drive.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: What happens if GameFragment is inactive when one of
GameViewModel’s live data properties gets updated? Won’t this
make the app crash?
A: No. Live data is lifecycle-aware, so it only notifies active lifecycle
observers when its property values have changed. If GameFragment
is inactive when GameViewModel’s properties get updated,
GameFragment won’t get notified, so you don’t have to worry about
the app crashing.
Q: Is there a LiveData type too?
A: Yes! The LiveData type is like MutableLiveData except that
its value property can’t be updated. You’ll find out how the
LiveData type is used a few pages ahead.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. GameFragment asks the ViewModelProvider class for an
instance of GameViewModel.
The GameViewModel object is initialized, and the values of its
three MutableLiveData properties—livesLeft,
incorrectGuesses, and secretWordDisplay—are set.
2. GameFragment observes the livesLeft, incorrectGuesses, and
secretWordDisplay properties in the GameViewModel.
3. GameFragment updates its views with the values of the
properties it’s observing.
4. When the user makes a correct guess, secretWordDisplay’s
value is updated, and the new value is passed to
GameFragment.
GameFragment responds by updating its word view, which is
displayed on the screen.
5. When the user makes an incorrect guess, the values for
incorrectGuesses and livesLeft are updated, and passed to
GameFragment.
GameFragment responds by updating its views.
6. When isWon() or isLost() return true, GameFragment
navigates to ResultFragment, passing it the result.
ResultFragment displays the result.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, GameFragment is displayed as before.
When we make a correct guess, the secret word display gets updated. When
we make an incorrect guess, the lives left is updated, and our guess is added
to the incorrect guesses display.
If we guess all the letters or lose all our lives, the app navigates to
ResultFragment, which displays the result.
The game behaves in the same way as before, but behind the scenes, it
responds using live data.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL
The code below describes a view model named MyViewModel. See if
you can change the code so that it uses live data to let fragments
respond to the rate property changing.
package com.hfad.myapp
import androidx.lifecycle.ViewModel
import android.util.Log
class MyViewModel : ViewModel() {
 var rate = 2
 init {
 Log.i("MyViewModel", "ViewModel created")
 }
 override fun onCleared() {
 Log.i("MyViewModel", "ViewModel cleared")
 }
 fun updateRate(newRate: Int) {
 rate = newRate
 }
 fun Calculation(val1: Int, val2: Int): Int {
 Log.i("MyViewModel", "Called Calculation")
 return (val1 + val2) * rate
 }
 fun JoinTogether(text1: String, text2: String): String {
 Log.i("MyViewModel", "Called JoinTogether")
 return ("${text1} ${text2}")
 }
}
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL SOLUTION
The code below describes a view model named MyViewModel. See if
you can change the code so that it uses live data to let fragments
respond to the rate property changing.
Fragments can update GameViewModel’s
properties
So far, we’ve updated the code in GameViewModel and
GameFragment so that it uses live data. Each time the value of a
MutableLiveData property in GameViewModel gets updated,
GameFragment responds by updating its views.
There’s a slight problem with the code, however. GameFragment has full
access to GameViewModel’s properties and methods, so if it wanted to, it
could use them inappropriately. There’s nothing to stop the fragment from,
say, updating the livesLeft property to 100 so that the user can make
many more guesses and win the game each time she plays.
To get around this problem, we’re going to restrict direct access to the
GameViewModel’s properties so that only methods in the view model
can update them.
You can restrict direct access to a view model’s property by marking it
private, and providing read-only access via another property’s getter.
Keep your privates private
To protect GameViewModel’s properties, we’ll mark each one as
private so that only code in GameViewModel can update their values.
We’ll then expose a read-only version of each MutableLiveData
property that GameFragment needs to observe. Instead of defining the
livesLeft property using code like this:
val livesLeft = MutableLiveData<Int>(8)
we’ll use the following:
Here, the _livesLeft property holds a reference to a
MutableLiveData object. GameFragment doesn’t have access to this
property because it’s marked as private.
GameFragment can, however, access the value of this property using
livesLeft’s getter. livesLeft’s type is LiveData, which is like
MutableLiveData except that it can’t be used to update the underlying
object’s value property: GamesFragment can read the value, but it
can’t update it.
When you structure your code in this way, the private property is sometimes
called a backing property. It holds a reference to an object that other
classes only have access to via another property.
Let’s update the GameViewModel code.
The full code for GameViewModel.kt
We’ll update the code for GameViewModel so that it uses backing
properties to restrict direct access to its live data properties. We’ll also mark
as private any properties and methods that GameFragment doesn’t need
to use.
Here’s the full code for GameViewModel.kt; update the code to include our
changes (in bold):
Let’s go through what happens when the code runs.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. GameFragment asks the ViewModelProvider class for an
instance of GameViewModel.
2. GameViewModel’s properties are initialized.
livesLeft, incorrectGuesses, and
secretWordDisplay are LiveData properties that refer to
the same underlying objects as their MutableLiveData backing
properties.
3. GameFragment observes the livesLeft, incorrectGuesses, and
secretWordDisplay properties.
GameFragment can’t update any of these properties, but it
responds when GameViewModel updates any of the backing
properties because they refer to the same underlying object.
4. GameFragment continues to respond to value changes until
isWon() or isLost() returns true.
GameFragment navigates to ResultFragment, passing it the
result. ResultFragment displays the result.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, it works in the same way as before. This time,
however, we’ve protected GameViewModel’s MutableLiveData
properties by restricting GameFragment’s access to them.
We’ve nearly finished updating the Guessing Game app. There’s just one
more thing we need to change...
GameFragment still includes game logic
In the current version of the app, GameFragment decides when the game
is finished by calling GameViewModel’s isWon() and isLost()
methods after the user has made each guess. If either of these returns true,
GameFragment navigates to ResultFragment, passing it the result.
Here’s the current code:
The problem with this approach is that GameFragment decides when the
game is over instead of GameViewModel. As determining when the game
has finished is a game decision, it’s something that GameViewModel
should be responsible for, not GameFragment.
Make GameViewModel decide when the game is over
To deal with this, we’ll add a MutableLiveData<Boolean> property
named _gameOver to GameViewModel, whose value we’ll expose
using a LiveData property named gameOver. We’ll set this property to
true when the user wins or loses the game. When this happens,
GameFragment will respond by navigating to ResultFragment.
You’re already familiar with the changes that are required to do this, so
before we show you the code, try the following exercise.
Pool Puzzle
Your goal is to add a gameOver property (with a _gameOver backing
property) to GameViewModel so that GameFragment can respond
when its value (a Boolean) gets updated. The property should be
initialized with a value of false. Take code snippets from the pool and place
them into the blank lines in the code. You may not use the same snippet
more than once, and you won’t need to use all the snippets.
package com.hfad.guessinggame
import androidx.lifecycle.ViewModel
import androidx.lifecycle.MutableLiveData
import androidx.lifecycle.LiveData
class GameViewModel : ViewModel() {
 ...

.................................................................
...........................

.................................................................
...........................

.................................................................
...........................
 ...
}
NOTE
Note: each thing from the pool can only be used once!
Pool Puzzle Solution
Your goal is to add a gameOver property (with a _gameOver backing
property) to GameViewModel so that GameFragment can respond
when its value (a Boolean) gets updated. The property should be
initialized with a value of false. Take code snippets from the pool and place
them into the blank lines in the code. You may not use the same snippet
more than once, and you won’t need to use all the snippets.
The full code for GameViewModel.kt
We need to add a gameOver property to GameViewModel, along with a
_gameOver backing property. We’ll get the makeGuess() method to set
it to true when the user has guessed all of the letters in the secret word, or
run out of lives.
Here’s the full code for GameViewModel; update the code in
GameViewModel.kt to include the changes shown below (in bold):
Make GameFragment observe the new
property
Now that we’ve added the gameOver property to GameViewModel, we
need to make GameFragment respond to when it’s been updated. We’ll
make the fragment observe the property, so that when its value is changed
to true, the fragment will navigate to ResultFragment.
Here’s the code for GameFragment; update the code in GameFragment.kt
so that it includes the changes below (in bold):
That’s it! Let’s go through what happens when it runs.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. GameFragment asks the ViewModelProvider class for an
instance of GameViewModel.
2. GameViewModel’s properties are initialized.
The _gameOver and gameOver properties refer to a
MutableLiveData<Boolean> object whose value is set to
false.
3. GameFragment observes the GameViewModel’s gameOver
property.
GameFragment can’t update the MutableLiveData object
that the gameOver property refers to, but it can respond to when
its value changes.
4. Each time the GameViewModel’s makeGuess() method is
called, it checks whether isWon() or isLost() returns true.
If either is true, it sets the value of its _gameOver property to
true.
5. GameFragment observes the value has been updated to true
via the GameViewModel’s gameOver property.
The new value is passed to GameFragment.
6. GameFragment responds by navigating to ResultFragment,
passing it the result.
We’ll take the app for a test drive after the following exercise.
Fragment Magnets
Somebody wrote the code for a fragment named LotteryFragment on
the fridge door, but a freak kitchen blizzard blew some of the code away.
Can you piece it back together again?
The fragment needs to observe LotteryViewModel’s
winningNumbers property, which is defined like this:
private val _winningNumbers = MutableLiveData<String>()
val winningNumbers: LiveData<String>
 get() = _winningNumbers
When winningNumbers changes, LotteryFragment needs to update
its numbers view with the new value.
Fragment Magnets Solution
Somebody wrote the code for a fragment named LotteryFragment on
the fridge door, but a freak kitchen blizzard blew some of the code away.
Can you piece it back together again?
The fragment needs to observe LotteryViewModel’s
winningNumbers property, which is defined like this:
private val _winningNumbers = MutableLiveData<String>()
val winningNumbers: LiveData<String>
 get() = _winningNumbers
When winningNumbers changes, LotteryFragment needs to update
its numbers view with the new value.
Test Drive
When we run the app, it works in the same way as before. This time,
however, GameViewModel decides when the game is over instead of
GameFragment. The fragment simply observes the view model’s
gameOver property, and navigates to ResultFragment when it’s
changed to true.
Congratulations! You’ve now built an app that uses live data to respond to
changes as and when they occur. In the next chapter, we’ll build on this still
further using a new technique called data binding.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 12 under your belt and now you’ve added live data
to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
Live data lets the view model’s properties tell interested parties
(such as fragments and activities) when its values have
changed.
To make a property use live data, define the property using
val, and change its type to MutableLiveData<Type>
where Type is the type of data the property needs to hold.
The MutableLiveData object’s value property is used to
hold its value. This property is nullable.
You make a fragment or activity respond to changes in the
view model by calling the property’s observe method and
specifying how the new value should be used.
You can restrict direct access to a view model’s properties
using backing properties.
The LiveData type is like MutableLiveData except that
it’s immutable. It’s used to expose a MutableLiveData
object’s value while preventing it from being updated.
Chapter 13. Data Binding:
Building Smart Layouts
Layouts can do more than control your app’s appearance.
All of the layouts you’ve written so far have been told how they should
behave by activity or fragment code. But just imagine if the layouts could
think for themselves, and make their own decisions. In this chapter, we’ll
introduce you to data binding: a way of boosting your layout’s IQ. You’ll
find out how to make views get values directly from the view model.
You’ll use listener binding to make buttons call their methods. You’ll even
discover how one simple line of code lets views respond to live data
updates. Soon, your layouts will be more powerful than ever before.
Back to the Guessing Game app
In the previous two chapters, you built a Guessing Game app that lets the
user guess which letters are included in a secret word. When the user
guesses all the letters or runs out of lives, the game ends.
The app uses two view models—GameViewModel and
ResultViewModel—which hold the app’s game logic and data, and
maintain its state when the app is rotated. GameViewModel is used by
GameFragment, and ResultViewModel is used by
ResultFragment:
The first screen the user sees is GameFragment, and she interacts with it
to play the game. It displays information—such as the number of lives left
and any incorrect guesses the user has made—and lets the user make
guesses.
When the game is over, the app navigates to ResultFragment. This
screen tells the user whether she has won or lost the game, and what the
secret word was.
The fragments update the views in their
layouts
Each of the app’s fragments are responsible for updating the views in their
layouts. ResultFragment, for example, sets the text in its won_lost
text view to the value of ResultViewModel’s result property:
But while this approach works, it has a downside. When you make
fragments responsible for keeping views up-to-date in this way, it can make
your Kotlin code more complicated, and harder to read and maintain.
So what’s the alternative?
We can make the views update themselves instead
The alternative is to use a technique called data binding. With data
binding, views can get their values directly from the view model, so the
fragment code no longer has to keep them updated. Instead of using code in
ResultFragment to update the text in the won_lost text view, for
example, we can use data binding to make the view get its text directly from
ResultViewModel’s result property.
In this chapter, you’ll learn how to use data binding by implementing it in
the Guessing Game app. Let’s go through the steps we’ll take to do this.
Here’s what we’re going to do
Here are the steps that we’ll go through to make the Guessing Game app
use data binding:
1. Implement data binding for ResultFragment.
We’ll update ResultFragment so that its layout uses data
binding to display the value of the result property directly from
ResultViewModel.
2. Implement data binding for GameFragment.
We’ll then change up GameFragment so that its layout uses data
binding to display property values from GameViewModel. Along
the way, we’ll also make the layout dynamically respond to any
live data updates.
3. Add a Finish Game button to GameFragment.
Finally, we’ll add a new button to GameFragment’s layout that,
when clicked, immediately finishes the game.
Let’s get started.
Enable data binding in the app build.gradle
file
Just like with view binding, you need to enable data binding in the
android section of the app’s build.gradle file before you can use it in
your app. The code to enable data binding looks like this:
We’ve already enabled view binding in the Guessing Game app, so let’s
enable data binding too. Open the file GuessingGame/app/build.gradle, and
update the buildFeatures section so that it looks like this:
Then choose the Sync Now option to sync this change with the rest of your
project.
Now that we’ve enabled data binding, let’s implement it in
ResultFragment.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: I see that in the Guessing Game app, both view binding and data
binding are enabled. Do you always need to enable view binding in
order to use data binding?
A: No, you don’t. It’s quite common to enable data binding without
enabling view binding, and you’ll find out more about this later in the
chapter.
For now, all you really need to know is that we’re keeping the view
binding option enabled so that all the app’s existing code continues to
work.
ResultFragment updates the text in its layout
As you may recall, ResultFragment’s layout contains a text view with
an ID of won_lost, which is defined like this:
When the app navigates to ResultFragment, the fragment gets the
value of the result property from its view model, and displays it in the
text view using this code:
We’re going to change the fragment and its layout so that it uses data
binding. Instead of getting ResultFragment to update the text view,
we’ll make the text view get its value directly from the view model.
How we’ll implement data binding
To make the text view get its text from ResultViewModel, we need to
update the code for ResultFragment and its layout. We’ll do this by
going through the following steps:
1. Add <layout> and <data> elements to the layout.
The <layout> element is required for data binding, and the
<data> element is used to set up a data binding variable that links
the layout to the view model.
2. Set the layout’s data binding variable to an instance of the view
model.
We’ll do this using fragment code.
3. Use the data binding variable to access the view model’s
properties.
We’ll update the won_lost text view so that it gets its text value
directly from the view model.
Let’s begin by updating the layout code.
1. Add <layout> and <data> elements
Every layout that uses data binding takes the following form:
The above layout has a <layout> element as its root element. This
enables data binding in the layout, so it’s required by all layouts that need to
use data binding.
Within the <layout> element sits a <data> element. This is used to
specify any variables—defined using the <variable> element—that are
needed for data binding, such as the view model you want the layout’s
views to gets their data from. The above code, for example, uses:
to specify a data binding variable named resultViewModel whose type
is ResultViewModel.
The <layout> element also includes a view or view group for the layout’s
view hierarchy. If you want to display views in a linear layout, for example,
you’d put the <LinearLayout> element and its views inside the
<layout> element along with all of its views. You’ll see how this is done
a few pages ahead.
Once you’ve defined a data binding variable, you need to set it. We’ll see
how to do this next.
2. Set the layout’s data binding variable
You set the layout’s data binding variable using Kotlin code.
On the previous page, we showed you the code to add a data binding
variable (named resultViewModel) to ResultFragment’s layout
file fragment_result.xml:
<data>
 <variable
 name="resultViewModel"
 type="com.hfad.guessinggame.ResultViewModel" />
</data>
The variable’s type is ResultViewModel, so we need to set it to an
object with a matching type.
As you may recall, ResultFragment includes code in its
onCreateView() method that gets a ResultViewModel object like
so:
We can assign this view model to the layout’s resultViewModel data
binding variable by adding the following line to the onCreateView()
code:
This uses the fragment’s binding property to set the layout’s
resultViewModel property to the fragment’s view model object:
Once you’ve set the data binding variable, the layout can use it to access the
view model’s properties and methods. Let’s see how.
3. Use the layout’s data binding variable to
access the view model
ResultFragment’s layout defines a won_lost text view that needs to
display the value of ResultViewModel’s result property. Its text is
set in the fragment code like this:
Now that we’ve set a data binding variable for this view model in the layout
code, we can use data binding to set its text instead. The code to do so looks
like this:
The above code uses the resultViewModel variable to get the value of
the view model’s result property. It then sets the text view’s text to the
value of this property.
That’s everything that you need to know in order to implement data binding
for ResultFragment. We’ll show you the full code for
result_fragment.xml and ResultFragment.kt over the next couple pages.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: All of the other elements we’ve added to layouts, like
<LinearLayout> and <Button>, have all had an initial capital
letter. Why are <layout>, <data>, and <variable> all
lowercase?
A: All of the other elements you’ve learned about so far have had initial
capital letters because they are class names for types of View. The
<LinearLayout> element, for example, refers to the
LinearLayout class found in the android.view package.
<layout>, <data>, and <variable> are all lowercase because
they’re instructions, not Views. When Android sees the <variable>
element, for example, it treats it as an instruction to create a variable.
The full code for fragment_result.xml
Here’s the full code for ResultFragment’s layout; update the code for
fragment_result.xml to include the changes (in bold):
The full code for ResultFragment.kt
You need to update the fragment code too. Update the code for
ResultFragment.kt so that it includes the changes shown here (in bold):
Let’s go through what happens when the app runs.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. When the user completes a game, the app navigates to
ResultFragment.
2. ResultFragment gets a reference to its ResultViewModel
object.
3. ResultFragment assigns the ResultViewModel object to the
layout’s resultViewModel data binding variable.
The layout’s views can now use the variable to access the view
model’s properties and methods.
4. The won_lost view’s text is set to the value of the
ResultViewModel object’s result property.
The text is displayed on the device screen.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, it works in the same way as before. This time,
however, ResultFragment’s layout is getting the game’s result directly
from ResultViewModel.
We’ve now implemented data binding in ResultFragment. Before we
apply it to GameFragment, let’s take a closer look at the <layout>
element, and why it’s necessary for data binding.
<LAYOUT> UP CLOSE
As we said earlier, every layout that uses data binding must have a
<layout> element as its root element like this:
<layout ... >
 ...
</layout>
When you enable data binding in an app’s build.gradle file, it generates
a binding class for each layout with a <layout> element at its root.
This is the same binding class that gets generated when you enable
view binding.
In the Guessing Game app, the layout file fragment_result.xml has a
<layout> element as its root element. This means that its binding
class FragmentResultBinding will still get generated by data
binding even if view binding is switched off:
View binding and data binding generate the same binding classes,
but in different situations.
You add one or more data binding variables to the layout using the
<data> and <variable> elements:
View binding generates a binding class for every layout, while data
binding generates one for every layout with a <layout> element.
You set each variable to an object with a matching type in Kotlin code.
Once set, the layout’s views can use the data binding variable to access
its object’s properties and methods.
Layout Magnets
Somebody wrote the code for a layout using fridge magnets, but some of
them fell off when we shut the fridge door too firmly. Can you piece the
code back together again?
The layout needs to use data binding to display the welcomeText
property from a MyViewModel object in its welcome text view. The
view model resides in a package named
com.hfad.myapp.MyViewModel.
Layout Magnets Solution
Somebody wrote the code for a layout using fridge magnets, but some of
them fell off when we shut the fridge door too firmly. Can you piece the
code back together again?
The layout needs to use data binding to display the welcomeText
property from a MyViewModel object in its welcome text view. The
view model resides in a package named
com.hfad.myapp.MyViewModel.
GameFragment can use data binding too
You’ve now implemented data binding for ResultFragment so that the
text view in its layout gets its text directly from ResultViewModel’s
result property.
Next, we’ll do a similar thing with GameFragment: we’ll implement data
binding so that the text views in its layout get their values directly from
GameViewModel:
To do this, we need to update the code for GameFragment and its layout.
We’ll begin with the layout code.
Add <layout> and <data> elements to
fragment_game.xml
Just as we did with ResultFragment, we’ll begin by adding
<layout> and <data> elements to GameFragment’s layout. These
elements specify that the layout uses data binding, and define a data binding
variable. The code looks like this; update the code in fragment_game.xml to
include these changes (in bold):
As you can see, the code defines a data binding variable named
gameViewModel whose type is GameViewModel. Before we set this
variable in the fragment’s Kotlin code, let’s update the layout’s views so
that they get their values from the view model.
Use the data binding variable to set the
layout’s text
As you learned earlier, views can get data directly from the view model
using the layout’s data binding variable. fragment_game.xml’s word text
view, for example, can display the value of GameViewModel’s
secretWordDisplay property using this code:
Two of the views need to show extra text
The lives and incorrect_guesses text views, however, don’t just
display the property values: they include extra text. The GameFragment
code, for example, currently sets the incorrectGuesses view’s text
using this code:
so we can’t simply use the view model’s incorrectGuesses property
using the code below, or the extra text won’t be displayed:
To get around this problem, we’ll use String formatting to pass the
property value to a String resource. Let’s find out how.
String resources revisited
As you learned earlier in the book, you can add String resources to your
app’s String resource file to avoid using hardcoded text. The following
code, for example, defines a String resource named my_string that
displays the text “This is a String resource”:
String resources can have arguments
You can also define String resources that accept one or more arguments,
which is useful if you want to display more complex text. The following
resource, for example, uses a %s placeholder to specify where to place a
String argument that’s passed to it:
and this one uses %d to say where a number argument should go:
You can pass multiple arguments to a String resource by numbering each
one. The following resource, for example, takes a String as its first
argument, and a number as its second:
Use %s for String arguments and %d for numbers.
Add two new String resources to strings.xml
In the Guessing Game app, we’ll define two new String resources: one
for the number of lives left, and another for the incorrect guesses the user
has made. Open the strings.xml file in the app/src/main/res/values folder,
and add the two resources shown here:
Now that we’ve defined the two String resources, let’s use them in
GameFragment’s layout.
The layout can pass parameters to String
resources
In order to use the two String resources we just created, we need to pass
each one a parameter.
You pass parameters to String resources in your layout code like this:
where string_name is the name of the String resource, and arg1 and
arg2 are two parameter values. arg1 is passed to the String’s first
argument, and arg2 is passed to its second.
In the Guessing Game app, the lives_left String resource is
defined using:
<string name="lives_left">You have %d lives left</string>
so we can use it to display the livesLeft property from
GameViewModel using the following code:
Similarly, the incorrect_guesses String resource is defined using:
<string name="incorrect_guesses">Incorrect guesses: %s</string>
so we display the value of the incorrectGuesses property like this:
That’s everything that we need to know in order to change
GameFragment’s layout so that it uses data binding. Let’s see what the
full code looks like.
The full code for fragment_game.xml
Here’s the full code for GameFragment’s layout; update the code for
fragment_game.xml to include the changes (in bold):
That’s all the code we need to change in the layout file. Before we take the
app for a test drive, however, we first need to update the corresponding
fragment code in GameFragment.kt.
We need to set the gameViewModel variable
The first change we need to make to the GameFragment code is to set the
layout’s data binding variable gameViewModel to an instance of the
fragment’s view model.
GameFragment currently includes the following line in its
onCreateView() method, which uses the view model provider to get a
GameViewModel object:
viewModel =
ViewModelProvider(this).get(GameViewModel::class.java)
We can therefore assign this view model to the gameViewModel data
binding variable by adding the following line:
binding.gameViewModel = viewModel
Once the gameViewModel variable is linked to the view model in this
way, the layout’s views can use it to get their values.
We also need to make the data binding use live data
As well as setting the gameViewModel variable, we need to make the
layout’s data binding work with live data.
Unlike ResultViewModel, the GameViewModel code uses live data
so that when its property values are updated, the GameFragment code
responds. The following code in GameFragment.kt, for example, observes
the incorrectGuesses property, and updates the
incorrect_guesses view when it’s updated:
viewModel.incorrectGuesses.observe(viewLifecycleOwner, Observer {
newValue ->
 binding.incorrectGuesses.text = "Incorrect guesses:
$newValue"
})
As we’re now using data binding, we can make each view respond to live
data changes by adding the following line to the fragment code:
binding.lifecycleOwner = viewLifecycleOwner
Each time a live data property value in the view model gets updated, the
layout no longer has to rely on the fragment code updating its views. The
layout can respond to any updates without any further intervention from the
fragment.
That’s everything that we need to know in order to update the
GameFragment code. Let’s see what it looks like.
The full code for GameFragment.kt
Here’s the full code for GameFragment; update the code for
GameFragment.kt so that it includes the changes shown here (in bold):
Those are all the changes we need to make to GameFragment. Let’s run
through what happens when the code runs, and take the app for a test drive.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. GameFragment gets a reference to its GameViewModel object.
2. GameFragment assigns the GameViewModel object to the
layout’s gameViewModel data binding variable.
The layout’s views can now use this variable to access the view
model’s properties and methods.
3. GameFragment sets the layout’s lifecycle owner.
The layout can now observe the view model’s live data properties
and respond to any changes.
4. When the user makes a correct guess, the GameViewModel
object’s secretWordDisplay property gets updated.
The layout observes this change and its word view displays the
new text.
5. When the user makes an incorrect guess, the GameViewModel
object’s livesLeft and incorrectGuesses properties are updated.
The layout observes the changes and its corresponding views
display the new text.
6. When the game is over, GameFragment navigates to
ResultFragment.
Test Drive
When we run the app, it works in the same way as before. This time,
however, GameFragment uses data binding to get property values
directly from GameViewModel.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Can you use data binding to make views update properties in
the view model?
A: Yes! Views can update mutable properties using @= instead of @.
We’ll show you an example of this in the next chapter.
Q: You’re setting the word view’s text to
"@{gameViewModel.secretWordDisplay}". As
secretWordDisplay‘s type is LiveData, shouldn’t you use
secretWordDisplay.value instead?
A: No. The layout will automatically use the value property without
you telling it to.
Q: I tried to set the text of the lives view to
"@{gameViewModel.livesLeft}" but the app crashed. Any
idea why?
A: The livesLeft.value property is an Int?, and the view’s
text property needs to be a String. Try converting the property to a
String using:
"@{gameViewModel.livesLeft.toString()}" That should
stop the app from crashing.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL
The layout below needs to use a String resource (named msg) to
display this text in a text view: “Hello, user. The numbers are
numbersText. You guessed numberGuessed right.”
user, numbersText, and numberGuessed are properties in
LotteryViewModel where user is a String, numbersText is
a String, and numberGuessed is an Int.
Can you write the code for the String resource?
The layout is:
<layout
 xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 xmlns:tools="http://schemas.android.com/tools"
 tools:context=".LotteryFragment">
 <data>
 <variable
 name="vm"
 type="com.hfad.lottery.LotteryViewModel" />
 </data>
 <LinearLayout
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="match_parent"
 android:orientation="vertical">
 <TextView
 android:id="@+id/message"
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:textSize="16sp"
 android:text="@{@string/msg(vm.user,
vm.numbersText, vm.numberGuessed)}" />
 </LinearLayout>
</layout>
The String resource is:
<string
name="msg">...................................................
.......</string>
Answers in “ Sharpen your pencil
Solution”.
You can use data binding to call methods
So far, you’ve implemented data binding so that views get their values
directly from the view model instead of relying on fragment code.
Another way in which you can use data binding is to make a button call a
method in the view model without writing any extra fragment code. To see
how this works, we’re going to add a new Finish Game button to
GameFragment’s layout that, when clicked, will finish the game.
Here’s what the new version of the screen will look like:
To make the new button finish the game, we’ll do the following:
1. Add a new finishGame() method to GameViewModel.
This method will set the view model’s _gameOver property to
true. When this happens, the existing code in GameFragment
will respond by navigating to ResultFragment.
2. Add the new button to the layout and make it call
finishGame().
The button will call the method using data binding.
We’ll begin by updating the GameViewModel code.
Add finishGame() to GameViewModel.kt
We need to add a new finishGame() method to the GameViewModel
code that sets the value of _gameOver to true.
You already know how to do this, so here’s the new code for
GameViewModel.kt; make sure that you update the code to include the new
method (in bold):
That’s all the GameViewModel code we need to add. Next, we’ll add the
new Finish Game button to GameFragment’s layout, and make it call the
finishGame() method.
Use data binding to make a button call a
method when clicked
As we said earlier, you can use data binding to make a button call a method
in its view model without writing any extra fragment code. To do this, you
add an android:onClick attribute to the button, and set its value to an
expression that calls the method.
In the Guessing Game app, we want to add a new button to
GameFragment’s layout that calls GameViewModel’s
finishGame() method when clicked. The code for this button looks like
this:
The line:
android:onClick="@{() -> gameViewModel.finishGame()}"
is just like adding the following code to your fragment:
binding.finishGameButton.setOnClickListener() {
 viewModel.finishGame()
}
except that this time, no fragment code is required. Behind the scenes, data
binding uses the line:
android:onClick="@{() -> gameViewModel.finishGame()}"
to create an onClickListener for the button. When the user clicks the
button, the code is executed, which calls the view model’s
finishGame() method.
When you use a binding expression to call a method such as:
"@{() -> gameViewModel.finishGame()}"
the binding expression is sometimes known as a listener binding.
That’s everything that we need to know in order to add the button to
GameFragment’s layout and make it respond to clicks. Let’s see what the
full code looks like.
SERIOUS CODING
There are lots of other things you can do with binding expressions. Find
out more here:
https://developer.android.com/topic/libraries/data-binding/expressions
The full code for fragment_game.xml
Here’s the full code for GameFragment’s layout; update the code for
fragment_game.xml to include the new button (in bold):
Let’s see what happens when the code runs.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. GameFragment assigns the GameViewModel object to the
layout’s gameViewModel data binding variable.
The layout’s views can now use the variable to access the view
model’s properties and methods.
2. The user clicks on the Finish Game button.
The button calls the finishGame() method in the
GameViewModel object, which sets its _gameOver property to
true.
3. GameFragment observes that _gameOver has a new value.
It responds by navigating to ResultFragment.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, GameFragment’s layout includes a new Finish
Game button. When we click on the button, the app navigates to
ResultFragment, which displays the secret word.
There’s just one more tweak we’re going to make to the Guessing Game
app. Before we show you what that is, try the following exercise.
Pool Puzzle
Your goal is to update the layout code below so that its button, when
clicked, calls the eatIceCream() method in MyViewModel. Take code
snippets from the pool and place them into the blank lines in the code. You
may not use the same snippet more than once, and you won’t need to use all
the snippets.
<layout ...>
 <data>
 <variable
 name="myViewModel"
 type="com.hfad.myapp.MyViewModel" />
 </data>
 <LinearLayout ...>
 <Button
 android:id="@+id/button"
 android:layout_width="wrap_content"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:text="Eat Ice Cream"

.................................................................
..../>
 </LinearLayout>
</layout>
NOTE
Note: each thing from the pool can only be used once!
Answers in “Pool Puzzle Solution”.
Fireside Chats
Tonight’s talk: View Binding and Data Binding air their differences
Data Binding: View Binding:
View Binding, we need to talk.
We do? Why?
Surely you’ve noticed how people keep
getting the two of us confused. I mean, just
because we both have Binding in our names,
it doesn’t mean we’re the same thing.
You’ve got to admit our names sound similar.
Besides, we have a lot in common.
You think so?
Yes! We both generate binding classes. The same
binding classes. Don’t pretend that’s not true.
Maybe we do, but under completely different
circumstances.
It’s true that I’m much more convenient and helpful
than you. I generate a binding class for every layout,
and most of the time, that’s exactly what’s needed.
Developers thank me for it. I even get fan mail. “Oh,
View Binding, I’m your biggest fan! Thank you for
eliminating findViewById. I thought my pain
would never end!”
You can’t claim sole responsibility for getting
rid of findViewById. That’s down to the
binding class, not you. The binding class that
I generate, too.
Whatever.
Besides, generating a binding class for every
single layout is such a waste of space.
Strictly speaking, I ignore any layouts with a view
BindingIgnore attribute that’s set to true. That’s
way less complicated than your approach.
Complicated? I’m just more discerning than
you are. I only generate binding classes for
layouts with a <layout> element. That
way, the developer gets to decide exactly
where I’m needed.
Yes, complicated! Who really wants to add even
more XML to their layout code? That’s so much
extra typing!
So it means a bit of extra code, but I can do
things that you can only dream of. I let views
get their values directly from the view model,
for instance.
I can do that too. Using fragment code.
But that’s the point. You rely on fragment
code to tell the views what they should do,
but when I’m involved, that’s not necessary. I
let the views get the values directly, which
means simpler fragment code. I even let them
use live data properties so that they can keep
themselves up to date.
Huh. But what about updating property values? I bet
you still need fragment code for that.
No, I don’t. I have two-way data binding
where views can update values and respond
to changes. Look it up. It’ll change your life.
Huh. You’ll be telling me next you let views call
methods.
But of course. And why not?
It makes the layout code overly complicated. I just
can’t believe you’d be so irresponsible.
I hardly call simple method calls
irresponsible, and it saves the developer from
writing yet more fragment code. But I accept
that for more complex things, the code really
belongs in the fragment, not the layout.
So even you admit you have your limitations.
You’re just jealous.
Riiiiiight. You keep telling yourself that…
We can switch off view binding
We’ve nearly finished updating the Guessing Game app, but there’s one
more tweak we can make so that only the binding classes we’re using for
data binding will get generated.
As you know, data binding and view binding generate the same binding
classes, but under different circumstances: view binding generates a binding
class for every layout, while data binding generates the class for every
layout with a <layout> element at its root.
In the Guessing Game app, we’re only using the binding classes for
fragment_game.xml and fragment_result.xml. Since both of these files
include a <layout> element, we can safely switch off the view binding
option, and their binding classes will continue to get generated via data
binding:
NOTE
The only layout file that data binding won’t generate a binding class for is
activity_main.xml because it doesn’t include a <layout> element. We don’t need to use
this binding class, so view binding can be safely switched off.
Switch off view binding in the app’s build.gradle file
To switch off view binding, open the GuessingGame/app/build.gradle file,
and remove the view binding line from the buildFeatures section like
this:
Then choose the Sync Now option to sync this change with the rest of the
project.
Let’s take the app for a quick test drive and make sure that it still works.
Test Drive
When we run the app, the game works in the same way as before.
Switching off view binding has made no difference because data binding
has generated all the binding classes that the app needs.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to use data binding, and used it
in conjunction with view models and live data. This approach can be used
to simplify your fragment code and build reactive, responsive apps.
Binding-Cross
Each of the clues for the crossword below is a binding expression that’s
used for a TextView’s android:text property. Can you solve the crossword
using the output for each clue?
Hint: Each binding expression uses a String resource and a view model.
You’ll find the code for these on the next page, along with a layout that
includes the TextView.
Across
2 “@{@string/string2(vm.d[1])}”
3 “@{@string/string3(vm.d[2], vm.g[0])}”
6 “@{@string/string1(vm.a)}”
7 “@{@string/string3(vm.f[1], vm.h[0])}”
8 “@{@string/string1(vm.d[vm.i[1]])}”
Down
1 “@{@string/string3(vm.e[2], vm.g[0])}”
4 “@{@string/string4(vm.h[2], vm.a)}”
5 “@{@string/string4(vm.h[1], vm.g[2])}”
Layout:
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<layout...>
 <data>
 <variable
 name="vm"
 type="com.hfad.crossword.CrosswordViewModel" />
 </data>
 <LinearLayout...>
 <TextView
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"

android:text=............................................../>
 </LinearLayout>
</layout>
View model:
...
class CrosswordViewModel : ViewModel() {
 val a = "STRAW"
 val b = "RASP"
 val c = "CRAN"
 val d = listOf("BLUE", "BLACK", "RED")
 val e = listOf("GOOSE", "MOOSE", "ELDER")
 val f = listOf("LINGON", "WATTLE", "WEAVER")
 val g = listOf("FISH", "FLY", "BIRD", "HORSE")
 val h = listOf("SONG", "SEED", "HOUSE")
 val i = listOf(2,0,1,2,0)
}
String resource file:
<resources>
 <string name="app_name">Crossword</string>
 <string name="string1">%sBERRY</string>
 <string name="string2">%sBIRD</string>
 <string name="string3">%1$s%2$s</string>
 <string name="string4">%2$s%1$s</string>
</resources>
Binding-Cross Solution
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL SOLUTION
The layout below needs to use a String resource (named msg) to
display this text in a text view: “Hello, user. The numbers are
numbersText. You guessed numberGuessed right.”
user, numbersText, and numberGuessed are properties in
LotteryViewModel where user is a String, numbersText is
a String, and numberGuessed is an Int.
Can you write the code for the String resource?
Pool Puzzle Solution
Your goal is to update the layout code below so that its button, when
clicked, calls the eatIceCream() method in MyViewModel. Take code
snippets from the pool and place them into the blank lines in the code. You
may not use the same snippet more than once, and you won’t need to use all
the snippets.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 13 under your belt and now you’ve added data
binding to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
Data binding gives layouts direct access to properties and
methods.
Enable data binding in the app’s build.gradle file.
Add a <layout> element to the root of each layout that needs
to use data binding.
Data binding generates a binding class for each layout with a
<layout> element. This is the same binding class that gets
generated with view binding.
Use <data> and <variable> elements to define variables.
String resources can accept arguments.
Data binding lets views respond to when a live data property’s
value gets updated.
Appendix A. Leftovers: The Top
Ten Things (we didn’t cover)
Even after all that, there’s still a little more.
There are just a few more things we think you need to know. We wouldn’t
feel right about ignoring them, and we really wanted to give you a book
you’d be able to lift without extensive training at the local gym. Before you
put down the book, read through these tidbits.
1. Sharing data with other apps
If you want to share simple data with another app, you can do so with an
Intent. You can think of an Intent as an “intent to do something.” It’s
a type of message that lets you send data to another object—such as an
activity—at runtime.
Sharing data with Android’s intent resolver
If you want to pass text to another activity, you can do so using code like
this:
val sendIntent: Intent = Intent().apply {
 action = Intent.ACTION_SEND
 putExtra(Intent.EXTRA_TEXT, "This is some text.")
 type = "text/plain"
}
startActivity(sendIntent)
The code first creates an Intent named sendIntent. It uses the type
property to specify the type of data that’s being sent (in this case plain text),
and uses putExtra() to attach the data (here, it’s some text).
The action property tells Android which types of activity can receive the
intent. Here, it’s set using:
action = Intent.ACTION_SEND
which means that only activities that can send messages can receive the
intent.
The intent is sent using the line:
startActivity(sendIntent)
Behind the scenes, Android looks for activities across all the device’s apps
that can accept intents with the specified action and type. If it finds multiple
such activities, it displays an Intent Resolver screen, which lets the user
choose which app they want to share the data with.
Android then starts the activity, passing it the data.
Sharing data with the Android Sharesheet
In most cases, you’ll want to share data using the Android Sharesheet
instead. This lets you specify who you want to share data with and how, and
the code looks like this:
As you can see, the code includes an extra call to the Intent’s
createChooser() method. When this runs, it displays the Android
Sharesheet like this:
You can find out more about sharing data with other apps—and how to
make your app receive data—here:
https://developer.android.com/training/sharing
2. WorkManager
There are times when you’ll want your app to process data in the
background. This might be because it needs to access storage, for example,
or it needs to download a large file.
As you learned in Chapter 14, you can use Kotlin coroutines for tasks that
need to be executed immediately. But what if you want to defer the task, or
have a long-running task that must continue to run, even if the device
restarts?
Use WorkManager to schedule deferrable tasks
If you want to schedule a task to run in the background, you can use
Android’s WorkManager API. It’s part of Android Jetpack, and it’s
designed for potentially long-running tasks that are guaranteed to run even
if the user quits the app or restarts the device.
You can even use WorkManager to run tasks when certain constraints are
met, such as when WiFi is available, or chain complex tasks together.
You can find out more about WorkManager—and how to use it—here:
https://developer.android.com/topic/libraries/architecture/workmanager
3. Dialogs and notifications
In Chapter 9, you learned how to show the user a simple pop-up message
using a toast and a snackbar. These are useful for low priority messages that
appear in the app, and don’t require any user action.
There are times, however, when you need to display a message that prompts
the user to make a decision, or that’s displayed outside the app’s UI. In
these situations, you can use dialogs and notifications.
Use dialogs to prompt the user for a decision
A dialog is a small window that appears in the middle of the screen.
They’re normally used for situations where the user must make a decision
before the app can proceed:
You can find out how to create and use dialogs here:
https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/dialogs
Notifications appear outside the app’s UI
If you want to remind the user to do something, or tell them when they’ve
received a message, you can use a notification. Notifications appear on the
device status bar and the notification drawer, and may appear on the device
lock screen as well:
You can find out how to create and use notifications here:
https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/notifiers/notifications
4. Automated testing
If you create an app that’s intended to be used by thousands or even
millions of people, you will quickly lose users if it’s flaky or keeps
crashing. You can prevent many of these problems, however, using
automated testing.
Two popular testing frameworks are JUnit and Espresso. When you create a
new Android project, Android Studio usually includes dependencies for
these in the app’s build.gradle file.
Automated testing usually falls into two categories: unit tests and
instrumented tests.
Unit tests
Unit tests run on the development machine, and they check the individual
pieces—or units—of your code. They live in the app/src/test folder of your
project, and look something like this:
package com.hfad.myapp
import org.junit.Test
import org.junit.Assert.*
class ExampleUnitTest {
 @Test
 fun additionIsCorrect() {
 assertEquals(6, 3 + 3)
 }
}
Instrumented tests
Instrumented—or on-device—tests run inside an emulator or physical
device, and check the fully assembled app. They live in the
app/src/androidTest folder of your project.
We’ll show you an example of an instrumented test on the next page.
An instrumented test example
Here’s an instrumented test that checks whether a composable displays the
correct text:
package com.hfad.myapp
import androidx.compose.material.MaterialTheme
import androidx.compose.material.Surface
import androidx.compose.ui.test.junit4.createComposeRule
import androidx.compose.ui.test.onNodeWithText
import androidx.test.ext.junit.runners.AndroidJUnit4
import org.junit.Rule
import org.junit.Test
import org.junit.runner.RunWith
@RunWith(AndroidJUnit4::class)
class HelloTest {
 @get:Rule
 val composeTestRule = createComposeRule()
 @Test
 fun shouldShowHello() {
 composeTestRule.setContent {
 MaterialTheme {
 Surface {
 Hello("Fred")
 }
 }
 }
 composeTestRule.onNodeWithText("Hello
Fred!").assertExists()
 }
}
Go here to find out more about using automated testing with Android apps:
https://developer.android.com/training/testing
5. Supporting different screen sizes
Android apps come in all sorts of shapes and sizes, and you want your apps
to look good on all of them. There are several techniques you can use,
including constraint layouts (which you learned about in Chapter 4),
providing alternate layouts, and sliding pane layouts.
Provide alternate layouts
Android apps can have multiple versions of the same layout file that cater to
different screen specs. This is done by creating multiple layout folders, each
one with an appropriate name, and adding a separate layout file to each one.
To have one layout for devices with a width of 600dp or above (such as 7”
tablets), and another for smaller devices, add an extra folder to the
app/src/main/res folder named layout-sw600dp. Then put a layout for wider
devices to use in the layout-sw600dp folder, and one for smaller devices in
the layout folder.
When the app runs on a phone, it will use the layout in the layout folder as
normal, and when it runs on a wider device, it will use the one in the layoutsw600dp folder instead.
You can find out more about using width qualifiers here:
https://developer.android.com/training/multiscreen/screensizes#alternativelayouts
Use a SlidingPaneLayout
Some layouts include a navigable list of records, where clicking on an item
displays its details. On small devices, you might want the details to appear
in a separate screen, but on large devices, you might prefer to display the
list and details side by side.
To deal with this kind of situation, you can use a SlidingPaneLayout
to define separate panes for the list and details. The code looks like this:
The layout uses the layout-width attributes of each pane to figure out
whether they’ll fit side by side on the device. If the device is wide enough,
the layout displays them next to one another, and if it’s not, it displays them
on separate screens.
You can find out more here:
https://developer.android.com/reference/androidx/slidingpanelayout/widget/
SlidingPaneLayout
6. More Compose features
In Chapter 18 and Chapter 19, we introduced you to building UIs with
Compose. We think it has a bright future ahead of it, but it’s so new that at
the time of writing, some of its libraries aren’t yet stable.
We didn’t want to leave without giving you a glimpse into the future, so
here are some of the libraries and features we’re most excited about.
The Compose ViewModel library
In Chapter 19, we passed an existing view model to a composable so it
could access the view model’s properties and methods. If you use the
Compose view model library, this is no longer necessary; the composable
can get the view model for itself.
Add the following dependency to the app’s build.gradle file:
implementation "androidx.lifecycle:lifecycle-viewmodelcompose:1.0.0-alpha07"
Then add code like this to the composable:
Compose constraint layout library
In Chapter 18, we showed you how to arrange composables in rows and
columns. If you need something a little more flexible, however, there’s the
Compose constraint layout library. As you might expect, this library lets
you position composables using constraints.
You can find out more about this library, and how to use it, here:
https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose/layouts/constraintlayout
The Compose Navigation component
As you already know, you navigate between screens in a View-based UI
using the Navigation component. You define a separate fragment for each
screen, and the Navigation component decides which fragment to display.
When you use the Compose Navigation component, you no longer need to
use fragments. Instead, you define a composable for each screen, and the
Navigation component decides which one to display.
To use the Compose Navigation component, add the following dependency
to the app’s build.gradle file:
implementation("androidx.navigation:navigation-compose:2.4.0-
alpha08")
Then use code like this for your activity:
When the app runs, it looks like this:
You can keep up-to-date with Compose here:
https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose
7. Retrofit
In Chapter 14, you learned how to persist your data in a Room database
held on the device. But what if your data is held remotely instead?
In this situation, you can use Retrofit. This is a third-party REST client for
Android, Java, and Kotlin that lets you make network requests, interact with
REST APIs, and download JSON or XML data.
You can find out more about Retrofit here:
https://square.github.io/retrofit/
You can also find out more about including Retrofit in your app’s
architecture by going here:
https://developer.android.com/jetpack/guide
8. Android Game Development Kit
If you’re interested in developing games for Android apps, we suggest you
check out the Android Game Development Kit (AGDK). This is a range of
libraries and tools that let you develop, optimize, and deliver Android
games.
The Android Game Development Kit includes game libraries for C/C++
game development. There’s a GameActivity, for example, which
inherits from AppCompatActivity and uses a C API. There’s also a
way of using the software keyboard in C, and handling input from game
controllers.
NOTE
[Note from Marketing: Make sure you mention your book Head First C.]
You can read more about the Android Game Development Kit here:
https://developer.android.com/games/agdk
9. CameraX
If you want to use the device camera in your app, there’s a Jetpack library
you can use called CameraX. This gives you a consistent API that works
across most Android devices, and resolves device-compatibility issues. You
can use it to preview, capture, and analyze images. There’s even an
Extensions add-on that lets you access features used by the native camera
app that ships with the device.
Read more about CameraX here:
https://developer.android.com/training/camerax
10. Publishing your app
Once you’ve developed your app, you’ll probably want to make it available
to other users. You’ll likely want to do this by publishing your app through
an app marketplace such as Google Play.
There are two stages to this process: preparing your app for release, and
then releasing it.
Preparing your app for release
Before you can release your app, you need to configure, build, and test a
release version of it. This includes tasks such as deciding on an icon for
your app, removing any logging code, and modifying AndroidManifest.xml
so that only devices you want to be able to run your app can download it.
Before you release your app, make sure that you test it on at least one tablet
and one phone to check that it looks the way you expect and its
performance is acceptable.
You can find further details of how to prepare your app for release here:
http://developer.android.com/tools/publishing/preparing.html
Releasing your app
This stage includes publishing your app, selling it, and publicizing it.
Before you publish your app we suggest you go here:
https://developer.android.com/distribute/best-practices/launch
It includes checklists and tips to help you publish and manage your app.
For ideas on how to best target your app to your users and build a buzz
about it, we suggest you explore the documents here:
https://developer.android.com/distribute/best-practices/engage
and here:
https://developer.android.com/distribute/best-practices/grow
Chapter 14. Room Databases:
Room with a View
Most apps need data that persists.
But if you don’t take steps to store this data somewhere, it will be lost
forever as soon as the app is closed down. You usually keep data safe in
Androidville by storing it in a database, so in this chapter, we’ll introduce
you to the Room persistence library. You’ll learn how to build databases,
create tables, and define data access methods using annotated classes and
interfaces. You’ll find out how to use coroutines to run database code in
the background. And along the way, you’ll discover how to transform
your live data as soon as it changes with a little help from
Transformations.map().
Most apps need to store data
Nearly all of the apps that you’ve written so far have used a small amount
of static data in order to function. The Guessing Game app we built in
Chapter 11 to Chapter 13, for example, holds an array of Strings in its
view model so that the game can select one at random for you to guess.
In the real world, however, most apps require more than just static data;
they need to be able to save data that can change so that it doesn’t get lost
when the user shuts down the app. A music app might need to store
playlists, for example, and a game might need to record the user’s progress
so that they can go back to where they left off.
Apps can persist data using a database
In most cases, the best way of persisting the user’s data is to use a database,
so in this chapter, you’re going to learn how to use one by building a Tasks
app. This app will let the user add tasks to a database, and display a list of
all the tasks they have already entered.
Here’s what the app will look like:
Before we start building the app, let’s run through how it will be structured.
How the app will be structured
The app will contain a single activity (named MainActivity), which
will be used to display a fragment named TasksFragment.
TasksFragment is the app’s main screen. Its layout file
(fragment_tasks.xml) will include an edit text and a button, which let the
user enter a task name and insert it into the database. It will also feature a
text view, which will display all of the tasks that have been entered into the
database:
We’ll also add a view model (named TasksViewModel) to the app,
which TasksFragment will use for its business logic. It will include
properties and methods that the fragment will use to interact with the app’s
database. We’ll also enable data binding so that TasksFragment’s layout
has direct access to the view model.
Here’s how these components will interact:
To create the database, we’re going to use an Android library called Room.
So what’s Room?
Room is a database library that sits on top of
SQLite
Behind the scenes, most Android databases use SQLite. SQLite is
lightweight, stable, fast, and optimized for a single user, and these features
make it a good choice for Android apps. Writing the code to create,
manage, and interact with SQLite databases, however, can be tricky.
To make things easier, Android Jetpack includes a persistence library
named Room that sits on top of SQLite. With Room, you get all the benefits
of using SQLite, but using simpler code. It provides you with convenient
annotations, for example, that let you quickly write database code in a way
that’s less repetitive and less error-prone.
MVVM is an architectural design pattern that’s used to structure apps.
It stands for Model-View-ViewModel.
Room apps are usually structured using MVVM
Apps that use Room—including the Tasks app—are usually structured
using an architectural design pattern called MVVM, which stands for
Model-View-ViewModel. The structure looks like this:
This structure is similar to the one we used for the Guessing Game app we
built, except that there’s an extra Model layer for the database. It means that
the activity and fragment’s UI code is cleanly separated from the business
logic that’s held in the view model, and the view model is separated from
any code that underpins the database.
You’ll learn more about how to use the MVVM structure as we build the
Tasks app.
Here’s what we’re going to do
Here are the steps that we’ll go through to build the Tasks app:
1. Set up the basic app.
We’ll create the app, update its build.gradle files so that it uses the
libraries we need, and create the basic activity, fragment, and
layout code.
2. Write the database code.
In this step, we’ll add the code to create a database with a table,
along with the data access methods needed to interact with the
table’s data.
3. Insert task records.
We’ll create a view model and update the app’s fragment so that
we can use the app to insert records.
4. Display a list of task records.
Finally, we’ll update the view model and fragment code so that the
app displays a list of all the task records held in the database.
Create the Tasks project
We’re going to use a new project for the Tasks app, so create one now using
the same steps you used in the previous chapters. Choose the Empty
Activity option, enter a name of “Tasks” and a package name of
“com.hfad.tasks”, and accept the default save location. Make sure the
language is set to Kotlin and the minimum SDK is API 21 so it will run on
most Android devices.
Next, we’ll update the project’s build.gradle files so that they include all the
features and dependencies that are needed for the app.
Add a variable to the project build.gradle
file…
We’re going to use two Room libraries in this chapter, so we’ll add a new
variable to the project’s build.gradle file to specify which version we’ll be
using, and to keep things consistent. To do this, open the file
Tasks/build.gradle, and add the following lines (in bold) to the
buildscript section:
…and update the app build.gradle file, too
In the app’s build.gradle file, we need to enable data binding, and add
dependencies for the view model, live data, and Room libraries.
Open the file Tasks/app/build.gradle, and add the following lines (in bold)
to the appropriate sections:
Then click on the Sync Now option to sync the changes you’ve made with
the rest of the project.
Create TasksFragment
The app will include a single fragment named TasksFragment, which
we’ll use to display a list of all the tasks in the database, and to insert new
ones.
To create TasksFragment, highlight the com.hfad.tasks package in the
app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Fragment→Fragment
(Blank). Name the fragment “TasksFragment”, name its layout
“fragment_tasks”, and make sure the language is set to Kotlin.
Update TasksFragment.kt
Once you’ve added TasksFragment to the project, make sure that
TasksFragment.kt matches the code shown here:
RELAX
Don’t worry if the compiler doesn’t recognize the
FragmentTasksBinding class.
It’s because we haven’t yet added a <layout> element to the
fragment’s layout, which it needs to generate the binding class.
Update fragment_tasks.xml
We also need to update TasksFragment’s layout so that it uses data
binding, and includes views to let us enter new tasks and display a list of
existing ones.
Open the file fragment_tasks.xml, and update it so that it matches the code
shown here:
Display TasksFragment in MainActivity’s
layout…
In order to use TasksFragment, we need to add it to MainActivity’s
layout in a FragmentContainerView.
Update the file activity_main.xml so that it matches the code shown here:
…and check the MainActivity.kt code
Once you’ve updated the layout, open MainActivity.kt and make sure its
code looks like this:
Now that we’ve updated the fragment and activity code, let’s get to work on
the Room database.
How Room databases are created
Room uses a set of annotated classes and interfaces to create and configure
a SQLite database for your app. It requires three main things:
1. A database class
This defines the database, including its name and version number. It’s used
to get an instance of the database.
2. Data classes for the tables
All of the data in a database is stored in tables. You define each table using
a data class, which includes annotations to specify the table’s name and
columns.
NOTE
A Kotlin data class lets you create objects whose main purpose is to hold data.
3. Interfaces for data access
You interact with each table using an interface, which specifies the data
access methods your app needs. If you need to insert records, for example,
you can add an insert() method to the interface, and to get all records,
you can add a getAll() method.
Room uses these three things to generate all the code your app needs to
create the SQLite database, its tables, and any data access methods.
Over the next few pages, we’re going to show you how to write the code for
these three components by defining a database for the Tasks app. We’ll
begin by defining its table.
We’ll store tasks data in a table
As we said before, all of a database’s data is stored in one or more tables.
Each table is made up of rows and columns, where each row is a record,
and each column holds a single piece of data, like a number or piece of text.
You create a separate table for each type of data you want to hold. A
calendar app, for example, might have a table to record events, and a
weather app might include a table for its locations.
We want to store task records in the Tasks app, so we’re going to create a
table named “task_table”. The table will look something like this:
You define tables with an annotated data class
You specify any tables you want the database to include by defining a data
class for each table. The data class needs to include a property for each of
the table’s columns, and you use annotations to tell Room how the table
should be configured.
To see how this works, we’re going to define a data class named Task,
which we’ll use to create a table in the Tasks app’s database.
Create the Task data class
We’ll begin by creating the data class. Highlight the com.hfad.tasks package
in the app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File.
Name the file “Task” and choose the Class option.
When you’ve created the file, update its code so that it looks like this:
Specify a table name with @Entity
Now that we’ve created the Task data class, we need to add annotations to
tell Room how to configure the table. We’ll begin with the table name.
You name a table by adding an @Entity annotation to the data class,
specifying the table name. We want to give the table in the Tasks app a
name of “task_table”, and the code to do so looks like this:
Specify the primary key with @PrimaryKey
Next, we’ll specify the table’s primary key. This is used to uniquely identify
a single record, and can’t contain any duplicate values.
In the Tasks app, we’ll use the taskId property for task_table’s
primary key, and we’ll get the table to autogenerate its values so that they’re
unique. This is done using a @PrimaryKey annotation like this:
Specify column names with @ColumnInfo
The final thing we’ll do is specify column names for the taskName and
taskDone properties. This is done using the @ColumnInfo annotation
like this:
Note that the @ColumnInfo annotation is only needed if you want the
column name to be different to the property name. If you omit the
annotation, Room will give the column the same name as the property.
That’s everything that we need to know to complete the Task data class.
We’ll show you the full code on the next page.
The full code for Task.kt
Here’s the full code for the Task data class; update the code for Task.kt so
that it includes the changes shown (in bold):
Room uses this file to create a table named task_table with an
autogenerated primary key named taskId, and two extra columns named
task_name and task_done. Here’s what the table looks like:
You’ll find out how Room adds this table to the database when we write the
database class a few pages ahead. First, we’ll define some database access
methods so that the app can insert, read, update, and delete the table’s data.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: If I leave out the @ColumnInfo annotation, will Room still
create a column for that data class property?
A: Yes. It will create a column with the same name as the property. The
@ColumnInfo annotation simply lets you rename the column.
Q: Can I stop Room from creating a column for one of the data
class properties?
A: Yes. If you don’t want to persist the data for one of the properties in
the data class, you can annotate it with @Ignore. When you do so,
Room won’t create a column in the table for this property.
Use an interface to specify data operations
You specify how the app will access the table’s data by creating an
annotated interface. This interface defines a DAO—or Data Access Object
—which includes all the methods the app needs to insert, read, update, and
delete the data.
To see how this works, we’ll create a new interface named TaskDao,
which the Tasks app will use to interact with task_table’s data.
Create the TaskDao interface
We’ll begin by creating the interface. Highlight the com.hfad.tasks package
in the app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File.
Name the file “TaskDao” and choose the Interface option.
When you’ve created the file, make sure that its code looks like this:
Use @Dao to mark the interface for data access
Next, we need to tell Room that the TaskDao interface defines data access
methods. This is done by marking the interface with an @Dao annotation
like this:
Once you’ve annotated the interface with @Dao, you add annotated
methods that the app will use to interact with the data. If you want the app
to insert records, for example, you need to add a method for this to the
interface, and if you want it to get records, you need to add this method too.
The great news is that Room provides four annotations—@Insert,
@Update, @Delete, and @Query—that make adding these methods a
breeze. Let’s find out how these are used by adding some data access
methods to TaskDao.
Use @Insert to insert a record
The first data access method we’ll define is an insert() method, which
the app will use to insert a task into task_table. The method will have
one parameter—a Task—for the task we want to insert. We’ll also mark
the method with an @Insert annotation, which tells Room that the
method is used to insert records.
Here’s the full code for the insert() method:
When Room sees an @Insert annotation, it automatically generates all
the code the app needs to insert a record into the table so that you don’t
have to write it yourself. For the insert() method above, for example, it
generates all the code needed to insert a Task object’s data into
task_table like this:
Any methods marked with @Insert can accept one or more entity objects
for their arguments—objects whose type is marked with @Entity.
@Insert methods can also accept collections of entity objects. The
following method, for example, will insert all the tasks that are included in
the List<Task> argument:
Use @Update to update a record
Room can also generate all the code that’s needed to update one or more
existing records in the table. This is done by adding a method to the DAO
interface that’s marked with @Update. The following update() method,
for example, generates all the code that’s needed to update an existing task
record:
When called, this method updates the record with a matching taskId so
that its data matches the Task object’s property values.
Use @Delete to delete a record
There’s also a @Delete annotation that’s used to mark any methods that
need to delete specific records from the table. To delete a single task record,
for example, you could use a method defined like so:
The code that Room generates for this method will delete the record with a
matching taskId:
Use @Query for everything else
Any other data access methods are marked with @Query. This annotation
lets you define a SQL statement (using SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, or
DELETE) that will be run when the method is called.
NOTE
We’re not going to teach you how to use SQL in this book, but if you want to learn
more, we suggest reading Head First SQL by Lynn Beighley.
In the Tasks app, for example, we can use the following code to define a
method named get() to return a live data Task for the record with a
matching taskId:
We can also define a getAll() method, which will return a live data
List of all the records held in the table:
As these methods return live data objects, the app can use them to be
notified when the data changes. We’ll use this feature later in the chapter to
keep the list of task records displayed in TasksFragment up-to-date.
You now know everything that’s needed to complete the code for
TaskDao. We’ll show you the full code on the next page.
The full code for TaskDao.kt
Here’s the full code for the TaskDao interface; update the code for
TaskDao.kt so that it includes the changes shown (in bold):
We’ve now written the code for the Task data class (which defines a table)
and the TaskDao interface (which specifies the data access methods).
Next, we’ll learn how to define the actual database.
Create a TaskDatabase abstract class
You define the app’s database by creating an abstract class. The abstract
class specifies the database name and version number, and any classes or
interfaces that define the tables and data access methods.
In the Tasks app, we’re going to define the database using an abstract class
named TaskDatabase. Highlight the com.hfad.tasks package in the
app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File. Name
the file “TaskDatabase” and choose the Class option.
The TaskDatabase class needs to extend RoomDatabase, so update
the code for TaskDatabase.kt so that it looks like this:
Annotate the class with @Database
Next, we need to mark the class with @Database, which tells Room that it
defines a database. Here’s the code to do this:
As you can see, the @Database annotation includes three attributes:
entities, version, and exportSchema.
entities specifies any classes—marked with @Entity—that define the
tables you want Room to add to the database. For the Tasks app, this is the
Task data class.
version is an Int that specifies the database version. In this case, it’s 1,
as this is the first version of the database.
Finally, exportSchema tells Room whether to export the database
schema into a folder so that you can record its version history. Here, we’re
setting it to false.
WATCH IT!
If you modify the database entity files, you need to update the
version number.
If you change the schema without updating the version number, the app
will crash when you try to run it.
Add properties for any DAO interfaces
Next, we need to specify any interfaces (marked with @Dao) that will be
used for data access. This is done by adding a property for each interface.
In the Tasks app, for example, we’ve defined a single DAO interface named
TaskDao, so we need to add a new taskDao property to the
TaskDatabase code like this:
Create and return an instance of the database
The final thing we need is a getInstance() method that will create the
database and return an instance of it. The code looks like this:
That’s everything that we need for the TaskDatabase class. We’ll show
you the full code on the next page.
The full code for TaskDatabase.kt
Here’s the full code for the TaskDatabase abstract class; update the
code for TaskDatabase.kt so that it includes the changes shown (in bold):
We’ve now written all the database code needed by the Tasks app. Before
we build the rest of the app, try the following exercise.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL
A table named recipe_table needs to have the following columns:
See if you can annotate the Recipe data class and RecipeDao
interface below so that Room creates the specified table, along with
methods to insert, update, and delete its data.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL SOLUTION
A table named recipe_table needs to have the following columns:
recipeId name ingredients method
See if you can annotate the Recipe data class and RecipeDao
interface below so that Room creates the specified table, along with
methods to insert, update, and delete its data.
MVVM revisited
Earlier in the chapter, we said we were going to structure the Tasks app
using the MVVM (or Model-View-ViewModel) architecture pattern. Here’s
a reminder of what this kind of structure looks like:
We’ve completed all the Model code…
So far, we’ve written all the database code that the app needs by creating its
entity, DAO, and database definition files (Task, TaskDao, and
TaskDatabase). Writing all the database code means that we’ve now
completed the Model part of the app’s architecture.
…so let’s move on to the ViewModel
The next thing we’ll work on is the ViewModel part. To do this, we’ll create
a view model—named TasksViewModel—which will hold
TasksFragment’s business logic. The view model will include methods
that will use TaskDao to insert records into the database.
NOTE
We want to display a list of the tasks held in the database as well, but for now, we’re
going to focus on inserting records.
Let’s go ahead and create TasksViewModel.
Create TasksViewModel
To create TasksViewModel, highlight the com.hfad.tasks package in the
app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File. Name
the file “TasksViewModel” and choose the Class option.
We’re going to update the view model code so that TasksFragment can
use it to insert new task records. To do this, the code needs three things:
1. A reference to a TaskDao object
TasksViewModel will use this object to interact with the
database, so we’ll pass it to the view model in its constructor.
2. A String property that holds the name of the new task
When the user enters a new task name, TasksFragment will
update this property with its value.
3. An addTask() method, which TasksFragment will call
This method will create a new Task object, set its name, and
insert it into the database by calling TaskDao’s insert()
method.
The basic view model code for these three things looks like this; update the
code for TasksViewModel.kt so that it matches the code below:
Before TasksFragment can call the addTask() method, however,
there’s one more change we need to make.
Database operations can run in slooooowmoooo
Some tasks in Androidville, such as inserting records into a database, are
potentially quite time-consuming. For this reason, the Room persistence
library insists that any data access operations must be performed on a
background thread so they don’t block Android’s main thread and hold up
the UI.
NOTE
Technically, there’s a setting you can use to override this, but it’s way better to run tasks
such as this on a background thread so they don’t hold up the rest of the app.
As we’re developing Android apps using Kotlin, we’re going to use
coroutines to make sure all of TaskDao’s data access methods run in the
background.
We’ll use coroutines to run data access code in the
background
As you may already know, a coroutine is like a lightweight thread that lets
you run multiple pieces of code asynchronously. Using coroutines means
that you can launch a background job—such as inserting records into a
database—without the rest of the code having to wait around for it to
complete. This gives your user a more fluid experience, so it’s not like
trying to watch YouTube on Thanksgiving.
Changing your data access code to use coroutines is pretty straightforward.
You simply have to make these two changes:
A coroutine is a piece of suspendable code that can be run in the
background.
1. Mark each of the DAO’s data access methods with suspend.
This turns each method into a coroutine that’s run in the
background and can be suspended, for example:
2. Launch the DAO’s coroutines in the background.
To call TaskDao’s insert() method from
TasksViewModel, for example, you’d use the code:
These changes are needed for all data access methods except for ones that
return live data. Room already uses a background thread for methods that
return live data objects, which means you don’t need to make any extra
changes to your code.
Let’s update the code for TaskDao and TasksViewModel so they use
coroutines.
RELAX
Don’t worry if you don’t feel confident using coroutines.
The information we’ve given here is everything you need to know to
run data access methods in the background.
1. Mark TaskDao’s methods with suspend
The first thing we need to do is mark all of TaskDao’s data access
methods that don’t use live data with suspend. This means that we need
to apply this change to all of its methods except for get() and
getAll().
Here’s the full code for TaskDao.kt; update the code so that it includes the
changes shown here (in bold):
Marking methods with suspend turns each one into a suspendable
coroutine.
That’s all the code that we need to turn TaskDao’s methods into coroutines
that can run in the background.
2. Launch the insert() method in the
background
We next need to update TasksViewModel’s addTask() method so that
it launches TaskDao’s insert() method as a coroutine. The code to do
this is shown below, so update TasksViewModel.kt to include the changes
(in bold):
This change means that each time the addTask() method gets called, it
will use TaskDao’s insert() method (a coroutine) to insert records in
the background.
We’ve now written all the code we need for the Task app’s view model.
Next, we’ll add a TasksViewModel object to TasksFragment so that
it can access the view model’s properties and methods, and let the user
insert task records.
BRAIN POWER
Look at the code for TasksViewModel. What do you think we need
to do next in order to add an instance of it to TasksFragment?
TasksViewModel needs a view model factory
As you learned in Chapter 11, you add a view model to fragment code by
asking the view model provider to provide one. The view model provider
will return the fragment’s current view model object if one exists, or create
a new one if it doesn’t.
If the view model includes a no-argument constructor, the view model
provider can create an instance of it with no extra help. But if the
constructor has arguments, it needs the assistance of a view model factory.
In the Tasks app, we need the view model provider to get a
TasksViewModel object. Since TasksViewModel’s constructor
requires a TaskDao argument, we must first define a
TasksViewModelFactory class.
Create TasksViewModelFactory
To create the factory, highlight the com.hfad.tasks package in the
app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File. Name
the file “TasksViewModelFactory” and choose the Class option.
The TasksViewModelFactory code is almost identical to the view
model factory code you wrote in Chapter 11, so update
TasksViewModelFactory.kt so that it looks like this:
Now that we’ve written the view model factory, let’s use it to add a
TasksViewModel object to TasksFragment.
TasksViewModelFactory needs a TaskDao
To add a TasksViewModel to TasksFragment, we need to create a
TasksViewModelFactory object and pass it to the view model
provider. The provider will then use the factory to create the view model.
But there’s a problem: TasksViewModelFactory’s constructor
requires a TaskDao argument, so we need to get one of these before we
can create the TasksViewModelFactory object. TaskDao, however,
is an interface, not a concrete class, so how can we get a TaskDao object?
The TaskDatabase code has a TaskDao property
When we wrote the code for TaskDatabase, we included two key
things: a TaskDao property named taskDao, and a getInstance()
method to return an instance of the database. Here’s a reminder of what that
code looks like:
To get a reference to a TaskDao object in the TasksFragment code, we
can therefore call TaskDatabase’s getInstance() method, and
access its taskDao property. The code to do so looks like this:
The above code gets a reference to the current application, builds the
database if it doesn’t already exist, and returns an instance of it. It then
assigns its TaskDao object to a local variable named dao.
Now that we know how to get a reference to a TaskDao object, we can
update the TasksFragment code to create a
TasksViewModelFactory object, which we’ll use to get a
TasksViewModel. Let’s see what the code looks like.
The updated code for TasksFragment.kt
The updated TasksViewModel code is shown below. As you can see, it
now includes code to get a TaskDao object and create a
TasksViewModelFactory. The code then passes the factory to the
view model provider, which uses it to get an instance of
TasksViewModel.
Update the code in TasksFragment.kt so that it includes these changes (in
bold):
TasksFragment can use data binding
Now that we’ve added a TasksViewModel object to TasksFragment,
we can make the fragment use its properties and methods to insert a record
into the database. We’ll do this using data binding, which will give the
layout direct access to the view model’s properties and methods.
To set up data binding, we first need to add a data binding variable to the
fragment’s layout, so we’ll add the code shown here (in bold) to the
<data> section of fragment_tasks.xml:
We’ll then assign the fragment’s viewModel property to the data binding
variable by adding the line shown below (in bold) to TasksFragment’s
onCreateView() method:
We’ll show you the full code for both files a few pages ahead. First, let’s
update fragment_tasks.xml so that it uses its viewModel variable to insert
records into the database.
We’ll use data binding to insert a record
To insert a new task record into the database, we need to do two things: set
TasksViewModel’s newTaskName property to the name of the new
task, and call its addTask() method. We can do both of these in
TasksFragment’s layout with data binding.
Set TasksViewModel’s newTaskName property
To set the view model’s newTaskName property, we’ll bind it to the
task_name edit text in the fragment’s layout. The code to do so looks like
this:
Notice that we’re using @= to bind the property to the edit text instead of @.
The @= means that the edit text can update the property it’s bound to: in this
case newTaskName.
Call TasksViewModel’s addTask() method
To insert the task, we’ll use data binding to make the layout’s Save Task
button call the view model’s addTask() method when clicked. You’re
already familiar with how to do this, so here’s the code:
Those are all the code changes we need to make to fragment_tasks.xml for
it to insert a record into the database. Let’s see what the full code looks like.
The full fragment_tasks.xml code
Here’s the full code for TasksFragment’s layout; make sure that the
code in fragment_tasks.xml includes the changes shown (in bold):
The full TasksFragment.kt code
Before running the app, we also need to make sure that TasksFragment
includes all the code that’s needed to set the layout’s data binding variable.
Here’s the full code; update TasksFragment.kt (if you haven’t already done
so) to include the changes below (in bold):
Let’s go through what happens when the code runs.
What happens when the code runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. TasksFragment calls TaskDatabase.getInstance(), which builds
the database if it doesn’t already exist.
It names the database tasks_database, and uses the Task
data class to create a table named task_table. It then returns an
instance of the database.
2. TasksFragment gets the database instance’s TaskDao object,
and uses it to create a TasksViewModelFactory.
The view model provider uses the newly created
TasksViewModelFactory object to create a
TasksViewModel.
3. TasksFragment sets the layout’s viewModel data binding
variable to the TasksViewModel object.
4. The user enters a task name in the layout’s edit text view.
The layout uses data binding to set the view model’s
newTaskName property to this value.
5. The user clicks on the Save Task button.
This uses data binding to call the TaskViewModel object’s
addTask() method.
6. The addTask() method creates a new Task object, and sets its
taskName property to the value of newTaskName.
7. The addTask() method calls TaskDao’s insert() method.
This inserts a record for the Task object’s data into the database
table. The table autogenerates a value for the taskId primary
key.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, TasksFragment is displayed in
MainActivity. When we try entering two new tasks, nothing seems to
happen when we click on the Save Task button.
Clicking on the button has added the new task records to the database, but
we can’t yet see them. To see these records in the app, we need to make
further changes.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: When I tried to enter a task, the app crashed. Any idea why?
A: This can happen if you update the database schema (the entities that
the database contains) without updating the database version number.
Room keeps track of the schema for each version of the database. If it
spots any discrepancies, it adds an error message to the app’s logcat,
and the app crashes.
Q: I see. How do I fix this problem?
A: The simplest fix is to update the database version number in the file
that defines the database (in this case TaskDatabase.kt).
Q: How do I see the app’s logcat?
A: You should see an option for it in Android Studio. Any error
messages get logged here, so it’s a good place to look if you encounter
any errors.
Q: Are there any tools I can use to inspect the database and see
what records and tables it contains?
A: Android Studio includes a helpful Database Inspector you can use
for this purpose. You can find out more here:
https://developer.android.com/studio/inspect/database
Q: What other database features can I use with Room?
A: You can define relationships between tables, create views, migrate
data when you want to upgrade the database, and more. You can find
more details of these features here:
https://developer.android.com/training/data-storage/room
Q: In your layout code, you used "@=" to bind the edit text to the
view model’s property instead of "@". Why?
A: Because we wanted the edit text to update the property’s value, and
not just read its value. Using @= instead of @ enables this.
A bunch of components, in full costume, are playing a party game, “Who
am I?” They’ll give you a clue—you try to guess who they are based on
what they say. Assume they always tell the truth about themselves. Fill in
the blanks to the right to identify the attendees. Also, for each attendee,
write down whether the component is part of the Model, View, or
ViewModel layer of the app’s architecture.
Tonight’s attendees:
Name Model, View, or
ViewModel?
I take care of what the app’s screens look like. ______________ ______________
I persist data after the app’s shut down. ______________ ______________
I have a lifecycle, but I can’t exist on my own. ______________ ______________
I’m used for business logic. ______________ ______________
Room uses me to create a table. ______________ ______________
I have a lifecycle, and I’m a type of context. ______________ ______________
I help you interact with the data in the
database.
______________ ______________
Answers in “ Mixed Messages
Solution”.
TasksFragment needs to display records
You’ve now learned how to build an app that inserts records into a Room
database. The next thing we’ll do is update the app so that
TasksFragment displays a list of all the records that have been inserted.
Here’s what the new version of TasksFragment will look like:
To do this, we’ll use TaskDao’s getAll() method to get all of the task
records from the database. We’ll then display them in TasksFragment’s
text view by formatting them as a single String.
Let’s get started.
Use getAll() to get all tasks from the
database
We’ll begin by adding a property named tasks to TasksViewModel,
which will hold a list of all the tasks in the database. We’ll add the tasks to
the property by setting it to TaskDao’s getAll() method like this:
As you may remember, we defined the getAll() method in TaskDao.kt
using the following code:
As you can see, the method returns a LiveData<List<Task>> object:
a live data list of Task objects. This means that TasksViewModel’s
tasks property also has a type of LiveData<List<Task>>:
As the tasks property uses live data, it always includes the user’s latest
changes. If a new task is added to task_table, for example, the tasks
property’s value is automatically updated to include the new record.
Using live data in this way is good news for the Tasks app because we can
use it to display a list of tasks in TasksFragment that’s always up-todate. Before we can do this, however, there’s one more thing we need to
learn about.
A LiveData<List<Task>> is a more complex
type
When we introduced you to data binding, we showed you how to bind a
view to a String or number, including live data values. We were able to
do this because Strings and numbers are simple objects that can easily be
displayed in a text view.
This time, however, the situation is different. The tasks property’s type is
LiveData<List<Task>>, which is much more complex than, say,
LiveData<String>. Because of this, we can’t simply bind the layout’s
text view to the tasks property directly because the text view wouldn’t
know how to display it.
So what’s the solution?
Use Transformations.map() to transform live data
objects
Before we can use data binding to display the user’s tasks, we first need to
transform the LiveData<List<Task>> into something simpler that the
text view knows how to display. To do this, we’ll create a new property
named tasksString, which will hold a LiveData<String> version
of the tasks property.
We’ll create the LiveData<String> using the
Transformations.map() method. This method accepts a LiveData
argument, and a lambda that specifies how the live data object should be
transformed. It then returns a new LiveData object.
To transform the tasks property into a LiveData<String>, for
example, we could use the code:
Transformations.map() observes a LiveData object and transforms it
into another type of LiveData object.
val tasksString = Transformations.map(tasks) {
 tasks -> formatTasks(tasks)
}
where formatTasks() is a method (which we need to write) that
formats the tasks property’s list of tasks as a String. The
Transformations.map() method then wraps this String in a
LiveData object, so that it returns a LiveData<String>.
The Transformations.map() method observes the LiveData
object that’s passed to it, and executes the lambda each time it’s notified of
changes. This means that in the above code, tasksString will
automatically include any new task records the user enters.
Over the next few pages, we’re going to add the tasksString property
to TasksViewModel, and then use data binding to display its value in
TasksFragment’s layout. This approach means that we’ll be able to
display all of the user’s tasks in a text view that always stays up-to-date.
Let’s update the TasksViewModel code
We’ll begin by updating the TasksViewModel code so that it includes
the new tasks and tasksString properties. We’ll also add two
methods—formatTasks() and formatTask()—to help us transform
the LiveData<List<Task>> into a LiveData<String>.
Here’s the full code for TasksViewModel, so update TasksViewModel.kt
so that it includes the changes below (in bold):
We’ll bind the tasksString property to the
layout’s text view
Next, we’ll use data binding to bind the tasks text view in
TasksFragment’s layout to the tasksString property in
TasksViewModel. Here’s the code to do this; update fragment_tasks.xml
to include this change (in bold):
That’s the only change we need to make to fragment_tasks.xml in order for
it to display a String of the user’s tasks. Before we take the app for a test
drive, however, there’s just one more tweak we need to make.
We need to make the layout respond to live data updates
As you already know, the tasksString property is a
LiveData<String>, which means that it automatically includes any
updates that are made to the records held in the database. If the user inserts
a new record, for example, its data gets added to tasksString’s value.
As we’re using data binding to display the value of the tasksString
property in the tasks text view, we need to make sure that the layout gets
notified whenever the tasksString property’s value gets updated.
Doing so means that the text view will display any new records as soon as
they’re inserted.
You’ve already learned how to make a layout respond to live data updates:
by setting the layout’s lifecycle owner in the fragment code like this:
binding.lifecycleOwner = viewLifecycleOwner
We therefore need to update the code for TasksFragment so that it
includes this line. We’ll show you the full code on the next page, and then
go through what happens when the app runs.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: What other uses does the Transformations.map() method
have?
A: As Transformations.map() gets reevaluated each time it
receives new data, it’s also useful for things like calculations.
Suppose you have a live data rate property, and a calculation that uses
it. You could, say, perform the calculation inside a call to
Transformations.map() so that it’s automatically recalculated
each time the rate property changes.
Q: Do you always display lists as formatted Strings?
A: No. We did so here because it’s a relatively simple way of displaying
a bunch of records. You’ll learn about a better approach in the next
chapter.
The full TasksFragment.kt code
Here’s the full code for TasksFragment; update TasksFragment.kt: to
include the extra line (in bold):
What happens when the code runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. TasksFragment creates a TasksViewModelFactory object,
which the view model provider uses to create a
TasksViewModel.
2. The TasksViewModel’s tasks property is set to TaskDao’s
getAll() method, which returns a LiveData<List<Task>>.
It holds a live data list of all the task records from the database.
3. TasksViewModel’s tasksString property uses the
Transformations.map() method to transform the tasks
property’s value into a LiveData<String>.
It returns the tasks property’s records formatted as a single
String.
4. The layout’s text view uses data binding to display
tasksString’s value.
5. The user enters a new task record into the database.
The TasksViewModel’s tasks property is automatically
updated (using live data) to include the new record.
6. The tasksString property responds to the tasks property’s
update.
As it uses live data, it automatically includes the new record in its
String.
7. The layout responds to the tasksString property’s update.
The record the user just entered is included in the text view.
Test Drive
When we run the app, TasksFragment is displayed as before, but this
time, it shows us the tasks we entered earlier.
When we enter a new task, it gets added to the list of tasks as soon as we
click on the Save Task button.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to build an app that uses the
MVVM pattern to interact with a Room database. The user’s records get
saved to the database so that they persist when the app gets closed, and the
app displays any new records as soon as they’re inserted.
Mixed Messages
Some view model code is listed below, but the refresh() method’s code
is missing. Your challenge is to match each candidate block of code (on the
left) with the result property’s final value if the candidate code were
added to the refresh() method, and the method was called once. Not all
the values will be used, and some values may be used more than once.
Mixed Messages Solution
Some view model code is listed below, but the refresh() method’s code
is missing. Your challenge is to match each candidate block of code (on the
left), with the result property’s final value if the candidate code were
added to the refresh() method, and the method was called once. Not all
the values will be used, and some values may be used more than once.
A bunch of components, in full costume, are playing a party game, “Who
am I?” They’ll give you a clue—you try to guess who they are based on
what they say. Assume they always tell the truth about themselves. Fill in
the blanks to the right to identify the attendees. Also, for each attendee,
write down whether the component is part of the Model, View, or
ViewModel layer of the app’s architecture.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 14 under your belt and now you’ve added the
Room persistence library to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
Room is a persistence library that sits on top of SQLite.
Room apps are usually structured using the MVVM
architectural design pattern. MVVM stands for Model-ViewViewModel.
Define any database tables using an annotated data class. Use
@Entity to tell Room to use the class to create a table. Use
@PrimaryKey to define the primary key column. Use
@ColumnInfo to specify column names.
Define any data access methods in an annotated interface. Use
@Dao to tell Room to use its methods for data access. Use
@Insert, @Update, @Delete, and @Query to define the
required data access.
Define the database in an abstract class marked with
@Database.
If you update the database schema, you need to increment the
database version number.
Data access code needs to be run in the background. You can
do this by turning any data access methods that don’t return
live data into coroutines.
You can use the method Transformations.map() to
transform live data objects. The method observes a live data
object, executes a lambda when the object’s value changes, and
returns another live data object.
Chapter 15. Recycler Views:
Reduce, Reuse, Recycle
Lists of data are a key part of most apps.
And in this chapter, we’ll show you how to create one using a recycler
view: a super-flexible way of building a scrollable list. You’ll learn how to
create flexible layouts for your list, including text views, checkboxes, and
more. You’ll find out how to create adapters that squish your data into
the recycler view in whatever way you choose. You’ll discover how to use
card views to give your data a 3D material look. Finally, we’ll show you
how layout managers can completely change the look of your list with just
one or two lines of code. Let’s get recycling…
What the Tasks app currently looks like
In the previous chapter, we built a Tasks app that lets the user enter task
records into a Room database. The app displays the list of records as a
formatted String, and it looks like this:
We decided to display the task records using a formatted String since it
was a relatively quick and basic way of seeing the records that have been
added to the database.
The list, however, looks a little bland. So how can we improve it?
We can turn the list into a recycler view
Instead of displaying the list of tasks as a formatted String, we can
change it up so that it looks like this:
As you can see, each task record uses a text view and a checkbox for its
data, instead of plain text. The items are also arranged on cards in a
scrollable grid.
This kind of list is created using a recycler view. So what’s that?
Why use a recycler view?
A recycler view is a more advanced and flexible way of displaying a list of
data than using a simple formatted String. It buys you the following
benefits:
A rich UI for the list’s items.
Each item is displayed in a layout, so you can use views such as
text views, image views, and checkboxes to display its data.
A flexible way of positioning items.
Recycler views come with layout managers, which let you position
views in a vertical or horizontal list, a grid, or a staggered grid
where items have unequal heights.
You can use it for navigation.
You can make items clickable so that they navigate to another
fragment when clicked.
It’s an efficient way to display large data sets.
Recycler views use a small number of views to give the appearance
of a large collection of views that extend beyond the screen. When
each item scrolls off the screen, it reuses—or recycles—its view
for items that have scrolled onto the screen.
Recycler views get their data from an adapter
Each recycler view you create uses an adapter to display its data. The
adapter uses data from a data source (such as a database), and binds it to
views in the item’s layout. The recycler view then displays the items on the
device screen as a scrollable list.
The data source, adapter, and recycler view fit together like this:
We’re going to add a recycler view to the Tasks app. Let’s go through the
steps we’ll take to do this.
Here’s what we’re going to do
We’ll go through the following steps to add a recycler view to the Tasks
app:
1. Create a recycler view that displays a list of task names.
We’ll begin by creating a basic recycler view that just displays the
name of each task. Keeping this first version relatively simple will
make it easier to see how each part of the recycler view is
constructed, and how they fit together.
2. Update the recycler view to display a grid of cards.
After we’ve got a basic recycler view working, we’ll change it up
so that it displays the name of each task and whether it’s been
completed in a grid of card views.
Add a recycler view dependency to the app build.gradle
file
Before we can start building the recycler view, we need to add a
dependency to the recycler view library to the app’s build.gradle file. Open
the Tasks app, then open the file Tasks/app/build.gradle, and add the
following line (in bold) to the dependencies section:
When prompted, make sure that you sync this change with the rest of the
app.
Now that we’ve added this dependency, let’s start building the recycler
view.
Tell the recycler view how to display each
item…
The first thing that we’ll do is tell the recycler view how to display each
task record.
For the first version of the app, we want to display the name of each task in
the recycler view so that it looks like this:
So how do we do this?
…by defining a layout file
You specify how each item in the recycler view should be laid out using a
layout file. The recycler view uses this layout file when it needs to display
each item. If the layout file is comprised of a single text view, for example,
a text view will be displayed for each item in the recycler view’s list.
To create the layout file, highlight the Tasks/app/src/main/res/layout folder
in the project explorer, and then choose File→New→Layout Resource File.
When prompted, enter a file name of “task_item” and click on OK.
For the first version of the app, we want to display the name of each of the
recycler view’s tasks in a single text view, so we’ll add a text view to the
layout file we just created. To do this, update the code for task_item.xml so
that it matches the code below:
That’s all the code that we need to tell the recycler view how each item
should be laid out. Next, we’ll create the recycler view’s adapter.
The adapter adds data to the recycler view
As we said earlier, when you use a recycler view in your app, you need to
create an adapter for it.
The recycler view’s adapter has two main jobs: to create each of the views
that are visible within the recycler view, and display a piece of data in each
one. For the Tasks app, we need to define an adapter that uses task_item.xml
to create a bunch of text views (one for each task record that’s displayed),
and puts a task name in each one.
An adapter acts as a bridge between a data source and a recycler view.
We’ll build the adapter over the next few pages. Here are the steps we’ll go
through to create it.
1. Specify what kind of data the adapter should work with.
We want the adapter to work with Task data, so we’ll specify that
it uses a List<Task>.
2. Define the adapter’s view holder.
This controls how each view in the item’s layout should be
populated.
3. Inflate each item’s layout.
When the recycler view needs to display each item, we’ll inflate an
instance of task_item.xml for that item.
4. Display each item’s data in the layout.
We’ll do this by adding each Task’s taskName property value to
the layout’s text view.
We’ll begin by creating a file for the adapter.
Create the adapter file
We’re going to create an adapter for the recycler view named
TaskItemAdapter. To do this, highlight the com.hfad.tasks package in
the app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File.
Name the file “TaskItemAdapter” and choose the Class option.
Once you’ve created the file, update its code so it extends the
RecyclerView.Adapter class like this:
This turns the class into an adapter that can be used by a recycler view.
Tell the adapter what data it should work with
When you define a recycler view adapter, you need to tell it what sort of
data should be added to the recycler view. We’ll do this by adding a
property to the adapter that specifies the data type.
For the tasks app, we want the recycler view to display a list of task records,
so we’ll add a List<Task> property named data to the adapter. We’ll
also include a custom setter that calls notifyDataSetChanged() if
the property gets updated; this tells the recycler view that the data has
changed so it can redraw itself.
Here’s the updated TaskItemAdapter code; update TaskItemAdapter.kt
to include this change (in bold):
RELAX
Don’t worry if you get errors in your TaskItemAdapter code.
The code isn’t complete yet, and the error messages will go away when
we finish writing it.
Override the getItemCount() method
Next, we need to override the adapter’s getItemCount() method. This
tells the adapter how many data items there are so that the recycler view
knows how many to display.
In the TaskItemAdapter code, we’re using a List<Task> property
named data for the recycler view’s data items, so we can use
data.size to say how many items there are.
Here’s the getItemCount() method (in bold), which you can add to
TaskItemAdapter.kt:
Now that we’ve specified the type of data the adapter works with, we’ll use
it to populate the layout’s text view. We’ll do this by defining the adapter’s
view holder.
Define the adapter’s view holder
The view holder contains information about how a view in the item’s
layout should be displayed, and its position in the recycler view. You can
think of it as a holder for the root view of the item’s layout—the layout that
specifies how the recycler view should display each item.
In the Tasks app, we want the recycler view to use the layout file
task_item.xml to display task records. This layout’s root view is a
TextView, so we need to define a view holder that works with text views.
You define a view holder by adding an inner class to the adapter file that
extends RecyclerView.ViewHolder. It includes a constructor that
specifies the type of the layout’s root view (in this case TextView). The
adapter’s class definition also needs to be updated to specify the adapter’s
class name.
Here’s the updated code for TaskItemAdapter; update
TaskItemAdapter.kt so that it includes the changes shown here (in bold):
Now that we’ve defined a view holder, we need to specify which layout it
uses by overriding the adapter’s onCreateViewHolder() method.
Override the onCreateViewHolder() method
The adapter’s onCreateViewHolder() method gets called each time
the recycler view requires a new view holder. The recycler view calls the
method repeatedly when it’s first constructed to build the set of view
holders that will be displayed on the screen.
The onCreateViewHolder() method needs to do two things: inflate
the layout that’s used for each item (in this case task_item.xml), and return a
view holder. Here’s the code to do this for TaskItemAdapter, so update
the code for TaskItemAdapter.kt to include the changes shown here (in
bold):
RELAX
Writing adapter code can seem daunting at first, as it needs to do
several different things.
Take your time, keep going, and we know you’ll be fine.
As you can see, we’ve put the code to inflate task_item.xml in a new
inflateFrom() method in TaskItemViewHolder, which the
adapter’s onCreateViewHolder() method calls using:
TaskItemViewHolder.inflateFrom(parent)
This approach passes responsibility for the view holder’s layout to the view
holder instead of inflating the layout in the main body of the adapter code.
Add data to the layout’s view
The final detail that we need to add to the adapter is how to display the task
records in the view holder’s layout. We’ll do this by overriding the
adapter’s onBindViewHolder() method, which gets called whenever
the recycler view needs to display data. It takes two parameters: the view
holder the data needs to be bound to, and the data’s position in the data set.
In the Tasks app, we want to take the Task object at a certain position in
the adapter’s data property (a List<Task>), and display its taskName
in the view holder’s layout. Here’s the code to do this for
TaskItemAdapter, so update the code for TaskItemAdapter.kt to include
the changes shown here (in bold):
As you can see, we’re setting the layout’s text view text in a new bind()
method, which we’ve added to TaskItemViewHolder. The adapter’s
onBindViewHolder() method then calls this each time it runs. We use
this approach because it makes the view holder responsible for populating
its layout, instead of the adapter.
That’s all the code that we need to write for TaskItemAdapter and its
TaskItemViewHolder inner class. Let’s look at the full code.
The full code for TaskItemAdapter.kt
Here’s the full code for TaskItemAdapter; make sure that the code for
TaskItemAdapter.kt includes everything shown here:
The adapter code is complete
We’ve now finished writing all of the code that’s needed for
TaskItemAdapter. It does the following four things:
1. Specifies that it works with Task data
We did this by defining a List<Task> property named data.
2. Uses a view holder named TaskItemViewHolder
We added TaskItemViewHolder to TaskItemAdapter as
an inner class.
3. Inflates each item’s layout
It does this when its onCreateViewHolder() method gets
called.
4. Displays each item’s data in the layout
It does this using its onBindViewHolder() method.
As we said earlier, the adapter acts as a bridge between a data source and a
recycler view. The data source, adapter, and recycler view fit together like
this:
Now that we’ve finished writing the adapter code, let’s move on to the
recycler view part of this model.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Why is it called a recycler view?
A: Because a recycler view reuses—or recycles—its views. This makes
it a very efficient way of displaying a list of data.
Q: You added a view holder inner class to the adapter as well. Can
you remind me what that is?
A: It’s a holder for the root view of each item’s layout. Every recycler
view adapter that you create needs to use a view holder.
Q: Does it have to be an inner class?
A: No. As each view holder is usually tied to a single adapter, it’s often
defined as an inner class, but this isn’t mandatory.
Q: Why did you add inflateFrom() and bind() methods to
the view holder? Couldn’t you have included their code in the
adapter’s onCreateViewHolder() and
onBindViewHolder() methods?
A: We added these methods to the view holder because we wanted to
keep all the code that manages view holders in one place. If we’d left
the code in the main body of the adapter, we wouldn’t have had such a
clear separation of concerns.
This approach is particularly useful when you want to do more than
display a single text view for each item in the recycler view, as you’ll
find out later on.
We need to display the recycler view
The next thing that we need to do is display a recycler view in
TasksFragment (the Tasks app’s main screen), and get it to use the
adapter that we’ve just created.
Here’s a reminder of what the recycler view needs to look like:
How to add a recycler view to a layout
You display a recycler view by adding an
<androidx.recyclerview.widget.RecyclerView> element to
a fragment’s layout file. The code looks like this:
The line:
app:layoutManager="androidx.recyclerview.widget.LinearLayoutManag
er"
specifies that the recycler view uses a layout manager, which determines
how the recycler view positions its items. Here, we’re using a linear layout
manager, which means that the recycler view will display its items in a
vertical list with full-length rows.
NOTE
You’ll find out more about layout managers later in the chapter.
That’s all the code you need to know to add a recycler view to
TasksFragment’s layout, so let’s see what the code looks like.
The full code for fragment_tasks.xml
Below is the full code for fragment_tasks.xml (TasksFragment’s
layout). As you can see, we’ve replaced the text view with a recycler view,
so update the code for fragment_tasks.xml to include these changes (in
bold):
That’s all the code we need to write to add a recycler view to
TasksFragment’s layout. Next, we’ll tell the recycler view to use the
adapter we created.
Tell the recycler view to use the adapter
You make a recycler view use an adapter by creating an instance of the
adapter, and attaching it to the recycler view. You do this in the fragment’s
Kotlin code.
In our case, we want to make the recycler view use TaskItemAdapter.
This is done by adding the following code (in bold) to TasksFragment’s
onCreateView() method:
We’ll add this code to TasksFragment on the next page.
The updated code for TasksFragment.kt
Here’s the code for TasksFragment; update TasksFragment.kt to include
all the changes shown (in bold):
So what’s next?
We’ve added a recycler view to
TasksFragment’s layout
We’ve now written all of the code that we need to display a recycler view in
TasksFragment’s layout, and told it to use TaskItemAdapter as its
adapter. But there’s still one more thing left for us to do: we need to connect
the adapter to a data source.
As you learned earlier, the adapter uses data from a data source (such as a
database), and binds it to views in the item’s layout. The recycler view then
displays the items on the device screen.
The data source, adapter, and recycler view fit together like this:
So in order to display data in the Tasks app’s recycler view, we need to tell
TaskItemAdapter what task data to use.
We’ll make TasksFragment add task data to
TaskItemAdapter
We’ll tell TaskItemAdapter what task data to use by getting
TasksFragment to update its data property with a List<Task>.
TasksFragment will get this list from TasksViewModel’s tasks
property:
To do this, we first need to give TasksFragment access to
TasksViewModel’s tasks property.
Update the TasksViewModel.kt code
As you may recall, TasksViewModel’s tasks property is currently
marked as private. We need to remove this modifier in order for
TasksFragment to get the property’s value.
We’ll also remove all the code we added in the previous chapter to
transform the task data into a formatted String: this code is no longer
needed now that we’re using a recycler view to display a List<Task>.
Here’s the updated TasksViewModel code; update TasksViewModel.kt to
include these changes:
Now that TasksFragment has access to the tasks property, let’s make
it pass the property’s List<Task> to TaskItemAdapter.
TasksFragment needs to update
TaskItemAdapter’s data property
As you know, TasksViewModel’s tasks property holds a live data list
of tasks, which it gets from the database using this code:
As this property uses live data, we can make TasksFragment observe it
so that each time its value changes, the fragment is notified.
TasksFragment will then be able to assign the latest version of the list
to the adapter’s data property, making sure that the data displayed in the
recycler view is always up-to-date.
You’re already familiar with the code to observe live data properties, so
here’s the code we need to add to TasksFragment (in bold):
Let’s update TasksFragment.kt to include this change.
The full code for TasksFragment.kt
Here’s the updated code for TasksFragment; update TasksFragment.kt
to include all the changes shown (in bold)
We’ve finished writing all the recycler view code
It took us a while, but we’ve now finished writing all the code that’s needed
to display a list of task names in a recycler view. We did this by:
1. Creating an adapter named TaskItemAdapter
The adapter acts as a bridge between the recycler view and its data
source. In the Tasks app, the data source is a Room database
containing task records.
2. Attaching TaskItemAdapter to a recycler view
We added a recycler view to TasksFragment’s layout, and told
it to use TaskItemAdapter in its Kotlin code.
3. Passing an up-to-date List<Task> to TaskItemAdapter
We did this by making TasksFragment set
TaskItemAdapter’s data property each time
TasksViewModel’s live data list of tasks gets updated.
Before we take the app for a test drive and see what the recycler view looks
like, let’s go through what happens when the code runs.
What happens when the code runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. When the app is launched, MainActivity displays
TasksFragment.
TasksFragment uses TasksViewModel as its view model.
2. TasksFragment creates a TaskItemAdapter object, and assigns
it to the recycler view as its adapter.
3. TasksFragment observes TasksViewModel’s tasks property.
This property is a LiveData<List<Task>>, which holds an
up-to-date list of records from the database.
4. TasksFragment sets the TaskItemAdapter’s data property to
the List<Task>.
5. TaskItemAdapter’s onCreateViewHolder() method is called for
each item that needs to be displayed in the recycler view.
This creates a TaskItemViewHolder for each item. A layout
(defined by task_item.xml) is inflated for each view holder.
6. TaskItemAdapter’s onBindViewHolder() is called for each
TaskItemViewHolder.
This binds data to the text view in each view holder’s layout.
7. Each time TasksViewModel’s tasks property gets updated,
TasksFragment passes an updated List<Task> to the
TaskItemAdapter.
Steps 5 to 6 are repeated so the recycler view stays up-to-date.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, TasksFragment displays the name of each task in
a recycler view.
When we enter new tasks, these get added to the recycler view’s list. The
app works as planned.
You’ve now learned how to create a basic recycler view. Before we tweak it
to display the task records in a different way, try the following exercise.
Adapter Magnets
The Bits and Pizzas app includes a Pizza data class that looks like this:
package com.hfad.bitsandpizzas
data class Pizza(
 var pizzaId: Long = 0L,
 var pizzaName: String = "",
 var pizzaDescription: String = "",
 var pizzaImageId: Int = 0
)
The app needs to include a recycler view that displays the pizzaName for
each Pizza item in the following layout (named pizza_item.xml):
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<TextView
 xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content" />
See if you can complete the recycler view’s adapter code (below).
package com.hfad.bitsandpizzas
import android.view.LayoutInflater
import android.view.ViewGroup
import android.widget.TextView
import androidx.recyclerview.widget.RecyclerView
class PizzaAdapter :
RecyclerView.Adapter<...........................................>
() {
 var pizzas = listOf<..............>()
 set(value) {
 field = value
 notifyDataSetChanged()
 }
 override fun getItemCount()
=.............................................
 override fun............................(parent: ViewGroup,
viewType: Int)
 : PizzaViewHolder =
PizzaViewHolder.inflateFrom(parent)
 override fun
onBindViewHolder(.................................. , position:
Int) {
 val item = .......... [position]
 holder.bind(item)
 }
 class PizzaViewHolder(val rootView: TextView)
 :
................................... (rootView) {
 companion object {
 fun inflateFrom(parent: ViewGroup): PizzaViewHolder {
 val layoutInflater =
LayoutInflater.from(parent.context)
 val view = layoutInflater
 .inflate(R.layout.pizza_item, parent,
false) .....................................
 return PizzaViewHolder(view)
 }
 }
 fun bind(item: .......... ) {
 rootView.text =
.......................................
 }
 }
}
Adapter Magnets Solution
The Bits and Pizzas app includes a Pizza data class that looks like this:
package com.hfad.bitsandpizzas
data class Pizza(
 var pizzaId: Long = 0L,
 var pizzaName: String = "",
 var pizzaDescription: String = "",
 var pizzaImageId: Int = 0
)
The app needs to include a recycler view that displays the pizzaName and
PizzaDescription properties for each Pizza item in the following
linear layout (named pizza_item.xml):
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<TextView
 xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content" />
See if you can complete the recycler view’s adapter code (below).
Recycler views are very flexible
So far in this chapter, you’ve learned how to build a basic recycler view that
displays a list of task names. You did this by creating a layout that’s used by
each item in the list, defining an adapter to populate it with data, and adding
a recycler view to TaskFragment’s layout.
While recycler views can seem overly complicated, they’re extremely
flexible.
In this app, we created a recycler view to display a simple list of task
names, but this was just to get you started. You can also use recycler views
to do other things, such as:
Displaying a list of images by adding an image view to the
item’s layout
Using a different layout manager to display items in a grid
instead of a vertical list
Making it respond to clicks so that you can use it for
navigation
To show you how flexible recycler views can be, we’re going to change up
the recycler view we just created by getting it to show more information
about each task.
Let’s take a look at what the new version of the recycler view will look like.
Recycler view 2.0
We’re going to update the recycler view so that it shows the name of each
task in a text view, and whether each task has been completed with a
checkbox. We’ll display each task record on a single card, which will look
like it’s slightly elevated. The cards will be arranged in a grid.
Here’s what the new version of the recycler view will look like:
We’re going to create this version of the recycler view by changing
task_item.xml (the layout used by the recycler view’s items) so that it uses a
card view. This is a type of frame layout that has rounded corners and
shadows to make it look as though it’s elevated above its background.
Add a card view dependency to the app build.gradle file
To use a card view, we first need to add a dependency to its library to the
app’s build.gradle file. Open the file Tasks/app/build.gradle, and add the
following line (in bold) to the dependencies section:
Make sure that you sync this change with the rest of the app.
How to create a card view
We’re going to use a card view in task_item.xml that includes a text view
and a checkbox.
You create a card view by adding an
<androidx.cardview.widget.CardView> element to your layout
code. The code for a typical card view looks like this:
As you can see, the above code includes an extra namespace of:
xmlns:app="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res-auto"
This lets you add attributes that give the card rounded corners and a drop
shadow to make it look higher than its background. You add rounded
corners using the app:cardCornerRadius attribute, and the
app:cardElevation attribute sets its elevation and adds drop shadows:
NOTE
There’s also an app:cardBackgroundColor attribute that changes the card’s background
color.
Once you’ve defined the card view, you add any views to it that you want it
to include. In the Tasks app, we want to add a text view and a checkbox to
the card view to display the name of each task and whether it’s been
completed. Let’s see what the code for this looks like.
The full code for task_item.xml
Here’s the updated code for task_item.xml; update the code for this file so
that it includes the changes below (in bold):
Next, we need to update the adapter’s view holder so that it works with the
new layout, and populates the card’s views.
The adapter’s view holder needs to work
with the new layout code
When we defined TaskItemAdapter (the recycler view’s adapter), we
included a TaskItemViewHolder inner class. We used it to inflate the
layout (a text view) associated with each item in the recycler view, and
populate it with the task’s name.
Here’s a reminder of the code we used for the original inner class:
Now that we’ve changed task_item.xml, we need to update
TaskItemViewHolder so that it works with the new layout. To do this
we need to make three changes:
1. Update the view holder’s constructor so that it uses a
CardView instead of a TextView.
2. Change the inflateFrom() method so that it inflates each item’s
layout as a CardView.
3. Update the bind() method so that it populates the layout’s text
view and checkbox with the item’s taskName and taskDone
property values.
You’re already familiar with the code that’s needed to make these changes,
so we’ll show you the updated code for TaskItemAdapter—and its
TaskItemViewHolder inner class—on the next page.
The full code for TaskItemAdapter.kt
Here’s the updated TaskItemAdapter code that works with the new
layout code; update the code for TaskItemAdapter.kt so that it includes the
changes below (in bold):
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Can I display images inside a recycler view?
A: Yes! To do this, add an image view to the item’s layout, then
populate it in the view holder’s bind() method.
Q: Do recycler views only work with database data?
A: No, they can be used with data from other sources too, just so long
as the adapter has access to the data.
Q: I see that the view holder code uses findViewById(). I
thought we’d stopped using that?
A: The code uses this method to get a reference to each view in the
item’s layout that we want to populate with data. We’ve used this
approach as it’s a relatively simple way of adding data to each view.
In the next chapter, you’ll learn how to replace these calls using data
binding.
Q: Can recycler views use multiple layouts?
A: Yes! You can, say, make the first item in the list have a different
layout to the rest of the items.
To do this, you create each layout you want to use, and define a view
holder for each one. You then override the adapter’s
getItemViewType() method to say which view holder should be
used for which position in the recycler view. Finally, you update
onCreateViewHolder() to check its view type parameter, and
create the correct corresponding view holder.
What the recycler view looks like so far
If we were to run the app after updating the code for task_item.xml and
TaskItemAdapter.kt, we’d see a recycler view that displays tasks in a
vertical list of card views like this:
The recycler view arranges the cards in this way because we specified in
fragment_tasks.xml that it must use a linear layout manager like this:
By default, this layout manager arranges items in a vertical list with fulllength rows. You can, however, include extra options—or use a different
type of layout manager—to change the way in which items are displayed.
Let’s take a look at some of the possible options.
The layout manager gallery
Here are some of the other ways in which you might want to arrange items
in a recycler view, and how to create each one.
Display items in a horizontal row
A linear layout manager displays items in a vertical list by default. You can,
however, display items in a horizontal row instead by changing the
orientation to horizontal:
<androidx.recyclerview.widget.RecyclerView ...

app:layoutManager="androidx.recyclerview.widget.LinearLayoutManag
er"
 android:orientation="horizontal" />
Use GridLayoutManager to display items in a grid
If you want to arrange items in a grid, try using a GridLayoutManager.
Use app:spanCount to specify how many columns the grid should have:
<androidx.recyclerview.widget.RecyclerView ...

app:layoutManager="androidx.recyclerview.widget.GridLayoutManager
"
 app:spanCount="2" />
Arrange items in a staggered grid
If your items have unequal sizes, you can use a
StaggeredGridLayoutManager instead like this:
<androidx.recyclerview.widget.RecyclerView ...

app:layoutManager="androidx.recyclerview.widget.StaggeredGridLayo
utManager"
 app:spanCount="2" />
Let’s apply one of these styles to the Tasks app’s recycler view, and see
what happens when the app runs.
Update fragment_tasks.xml to arrange items
in a grid
We’re going to update the recycler view so that it arranges its items in a
grid with two columns. The updated layout code for this change is shown
below; update fragment_tasks.xml to include these changes (in bold):
What happens when the code runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. TasksFragment creates a TaskItemAdapter object, and assigns
it to the recycler view as its adapter.
2. TasksFragment sets the TaskItemAdapter’s data property to a
List<Task>.
TasksFragment gets this List<Task> by observing
TasksViewModel’s tasks property.
3. TaskItemAdapter’s onCreateViewHolder() method is called for
each item that needs to be displayed in the recycler view.
This creates a TaskItemViewHolder for each item. A layout
(defined by task_item.xml) is inflated for each view holder.
4. TaskItemAdapter’s onBindViewHolder() is called for each
TaskItemViewHolder.
This binds data to the views in each view holder’s layout.
5. The recycler view uses its layout manager to arrange its items.
As the recycler view uses a GridLayoutManager with a
spanCount of 2, it arranges items in a grid with two columns.
6. Each time TasksViewModel’s tasks property gets updated,
TasksFragment passes an updated List<Task> to the
TaskItemAdapter.
Steps 3 to 5 are repeated so the recycler view stays up-to-date.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, TasksFragment’s recycler view displays a grid of
cards, each one showing a task name and whether the task has been
completed.
When we enter new tasks, these get added to the recycler view as soon as
we click on the Save Task button.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to control the recycler view’s
appearance with layout managers, and display data in a scrollable grid of
cards.
In the next chapter, we’ll build on this knowledge to make further
improvements to the recycler view.
Pool Puzzle
Your goal is to update the layout code below so that it includes a recycler
view that displays its items in a three-column staggered grid. Take code
snippets from the pool and place them into the blank lines in the code. You
may not use the same snippet more than once, and you won’t need to use all
the snippets.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<LinearLayout
 xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 xmlns:app="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res-auto"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="match_parent"
 android:orientation="vertical">
 <..................................................
 android:id="@+id/recycler"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="match_parent"

.................................................................
..............
 ................../>
</LinearLayout>
NOTE
Note: each thing from the pool can only be used once!
Answers in “Pool Puzzle Solution”.
EXERCISE
The Bits and Pizzas app includes a Pizza data class that looks like
this:
package com.hfad.bitsandpizzas
data class Pizza(
 var pizzaId: Long = 0L,
 var pizzaName: String = "",
 var pizzaDescription: String = "",
 var pizzaImageId: Int = 0
)
The app needs to include a recycler view that displays the pizzaName
and PizzaDescription properties for each Pizza item in the
following linear layout (named pizza_item.xml):
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<LinearLayout
 xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:orientation="vertical"
 android:padding="8dp" >
 <TextView
 android:id="@+id/pizza_name"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content" />
 <TextView
 android:id="@+id/pizza_description"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content" />
 </LinearLayout>
See if you can update the adapter code on the next page so that it
displays the correct properties in the above layout.
NOTE
This is the adapter code that you updated in an earlier exercise. Can you get it to
work with the new version of pizza_item.xml?
...
class PizzaAdapter :
RecyclerView.Adapter<PizzaAdapter.PizzaViewHolder>() {
 var pizzas = listOf<Pizza>()
 set(value) {
 field = value
 notifyDataSetChanged()
 }
 override fun getItemCount() = pizzas.size
 override fun onCreateViewHolder(parent: ViewGroup,
viewType: Int)
 : PizzaViewHolder =
PizzaViewHolder.inflateFrom(parent)
 override fun onBindViewHolder(holder: PizzaViewHolder,
position: Int) {
 val item = pizzas[position]
 holder.bind(item)
 }
 class PizzaViewHolder(val rootView: TextView)
 :
RecyclerView.ViewHolder(rootView) {
 companion object {
 fun inflateFrom(parent: ViewGroup):
PizzaViewHolder {
 val layoutInflater =
LayoutInflater.from(parent.context)
 val view =
layoutInflater.inflate(R.layout.pizza_item, parent, false)
 as TextView
 return PizzaViewHolder(view)
 }
 }
 fun bind(item: Pizza) {
 rootView.text = item.pizzaName
 }
 }
}
EXERCISE SOLUTION
The Bits and Pizzas app includes a Pizza data class that looks like
this:
package com.hfad.bitsandpizzas
data class Pizza(
 var pizzaId: Long = 0L,
 var pizzaName: String = "",
 var pizzaDescription: String = "",
 var pizzaImageId: Int = 0
)
The app needs to include a recycler view that displays the pizzaName
and PizzaDescription properties for each Pizza item in the
following linear layout (named pizza_item.xml):
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<LinearLayout
 xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content"
 android:orientation="vertical"
 android:padding="8dp" >
 <TextView
 android:id="@+id/pizza_name"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content" />
 <TextView
 android:id="@+id/pizza_description"
 android:layout_width="match_parent"
 android:layout_height="wrap_content" />
 </LinearLayout>
See if you can update the adapter code on the next page so that it
displays the correct properties in the above layout.
Pool Puzzle Solution
Your goal is to update the layout code below so that it includes a recycler
view that displays its items in a three-column staggered grid. Take code
snippets from the pool and place them into the blank lines in the code. You
may not use the same snippet more than once, and you won’t need to use all
the snippets.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 14 under your belt and now you’ve added recycler
views to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
A recycler view is a flexible way of displaying a scrollable list
of data.
Add a dependency to the recycler view library in the app’s
build.gradle file.
For each recycler view, you define a layout for its items, and an
adapter that puts data into each item’s views. The recycler view
then displays these items.
Each adapter needs to extend RecyclerView.Adapter.
The adapter uses a view holder that extends
RecyclerView.ViewHolder. It contains information
about how each item’s layout should be displayed, and it’s
usually defined as an inner class of the adapter.
The adapter’s onCreateViewHolder() method inflates
each item’s layout, and creates view holders.
The adapter’s onBindViewHolder() method binds data to
the views in each item’s layout.
Add a recycler view to a layout using the
<androidx.recyclerview.widget.RecyclerView
> element.
A card view is a type of frame layout that has rounded corners
and elevation.
Add a dependency to the card view library in the app’s
build.gradle file.
Use a layout manager to control how items are displayed.
A LinearLayoutManager arranges items in a vertical list
or horizontal row.
A GridLayoutManager arranges items in a grid.
A StaggeredGridLayoutManager is like a
GridLayoutManager except the items can have unequal
sizes.
Chapter 16. Diffutil and Data
Binding: Life in the Fast Lane
Your app needs to run as smoothly and efficiently as possible.
But if you’re not careful, large or complex data sets can cause your recycler
view to glitch. In this chapter, we’ll introduce you to DiffUtil: a utility class
that adds extra smarts to your recycler view. You’ll find out how to use it
to make efficient updates to your recycler view. You’ll discover how
ListAdapters make using DiffUtil a breeze. And along the way, you’ll
learn how to get rid of findViewById() for good by implementing data
binding in your recycler view code.
The recycler view displays task data
correctly…
In the previous chapter, we added a recycler view to the Tasks app that
displays its data exactly how we want it to. Each task is shown in a separate
card, and each card displays the task name and whether it has been
completed. The cards are then laid out in a two-column grid like this:
…but when the data’s updated, the recycler view jumps
Each time we add a new task, the recycler view gets redrawn so that it
includes the new record and stays up-to-date. When it does this, however,
the recycler view jumps and it’s not very smooth.
Each time the recycler view needs to be updated, its entire list gets redrawn.
There are no smooth transitions to indicate what’s changed, and if the list is
very long, the user might lose her place. It’s also inefficient for large data
sets, and can lead to performance problems.
Before we solve these problems, let’s have a quick reminder of how the
Tasks app is structured.
The Tasks app revisited
As we’re sure you remember, the Tasks app lets the user enter task records,
which are stored in a Room database. It includes a recycler view, which
displays all of the records that have been entered.
The app’s main screen is defined by a fragment named TasksFragment,
which uses a view model named TasksViewModel. Its layout—
fragment_tasks.xml—includes a recycler view that displays a grid of tasks.
The recycler view uses an adapter named TaskItemAdapter, and its
items are arranged using the task_item.xml layout file.
Here’s how these parts of the app fit together:
We need to fix TasksFragment’s recycler view so that it no longer
jumps when a new record gets added. In order to do this, let’s revisit how
the recycler view’s data gets set.
How the recycler view gets its data
The following things happen each time the recycler view’s data needs to be
updated:
1. TasksFragment is notified when a record is added to the
database.
This happens because it observes TasksViewModel’s tasks
property: a LiveData<List<Task>> that gets its data from the
database.
2. TasksFragment sets TaskItemAdapter’s data property, which
holds the recycler view’s data.
It sets it to a new List<Task> (that it gets from the tasks
property) that includes the latest record changes.
3. TaskItemAdapter tells the recycler view that the data has
changed.
The recycler view responds by redrawing and rebinding each item
in the list.
The data property’s setter calls
notifyDataSetChanged()
The recycler view redraws and rebinds its entire list because of the setter,
which we added to TaskItemAdapter’s data property. Here’s a
reminder of the code:
The setter gets called each time the data property needs to be updated. As
you can see, it sets the data property to the new value, and then calls
notifyDataSetChanged(). This method tells any observers—
including the recycler view—that the data set has changed, so the recycler
view is redrawn to include the latest changes.
notifyDataSetChanged() redraws the entire list
Using notifyDataSetChanged(), however, is problematic. Each time
it’s called, it tells the recycler view that the data property is out of date in
some way, without specifying how. As the recycler view doesn’t know
what’s changed, it responds by rebinding and redrawing every item in its
list.
When the entire recycler view rebinds and redraws its items in this way, it
loses track of the user’s position in the list. If the list contains more than a
few records, this can cause the list to jump.
It’s also inefficient for large data sets. If the recycler view contains many
items, rebinding and redrawing each item is a lot of unnecessary work and
can lead to performance problems.
Each time notifyDataSetChanged() gets called, the recycler view
rebinds and redraws its entire list. This is inefficient, particularly for
large data sets.
BRAIN POWER
How do you think we could stop the recycler view’s entire list from
being redrawn each time the user enters a new record?
Tell the recycler view what needs to change
A more efficient alternative to calling notifyDataSetChanged() is to
tell the recycler which items in the list have changed so that it only updates
those items. If a new task record gets added to the database, for example,
it’s more efficient for the recycler view to just add that item than it is to
rebind and redraw the entire list.
Manually working out these differences can be tricky and require a lot of
code. The good news, however, is that the recycler view library includes a
utility class named DiffUtil that takes care of all this hard work for you.
DiffUtil works out differences between lists
The DiffUtil class specializes in finding out what the differences are
between two lists so that you don’t have to.
Each time an adapter is given a new version of the list its recycler view
uses, DiffUtil compares it with the old version. It figures out what items
have been added, removed, or updated, and it then tells the recycler view
what needs to be changed in the most efficient way possible:
NOTE
To be precise, it works out what the changes are using Eugene W. Myers’s clever
difference algorithm.
As the recycler view no longer needs to redraw and rebind its entire list,
using DiffUtil is a much more efficient way of updating a recycler
view’s data. It also means that the user doesn’t lose her place in the list, and
the recycler view can even provide smooth transition animations to make it
clear what changes there have been.
Here’s what we’re going to do
In this chapter, we’re going to make improvements to the Tasks app’s
recycler view so that it uses DiffUtil and populates its views using data
binding. These changes will make the recycler view more efficient, and
improve the user’s experience of it too.
Here are the steps we’ll take:
1. Make the recycler view use DiffUtil.
We’ll create a new class named TaskDiffItemCallback that
uses DiffUtil to compare items in a list. We’ll then update the
TaskItemAdapter code so that it uses this new class. These
changes will make the recycler view more efficient, and give the
user a smoother experience when they use it.
2. Implement data binding in the recycler view’s layout.
We’ll remove the calls to findViewById() in the
TaskItemAdapter code, and populate each item’s views using
data binding.
We’ll begin by making the recycler view use DiffUtil.
We need to implement DiffUtil.ItemCallback
In order to use DiffUtil with the Tasks app’s recycler view, we need to
create a new class (which we’ll name TaskDiffItemCallback) that
implements the DiffUtil.ItemCallback abstract class. This class is
used to calculate the difference between two non-null items in a list, and
will help make the recycler view more efficient.
When you implement DiffUtil.ItemCallback, you first need to
specify the type of objects it works with. This is done using generics like
so:
You also need to override two methods: areItemsTheSame() and
areContentsTheSame().
areItemsTheSame() is used to check whether two objects that are
passed to it refer to the same item. We’ll implement it using:
so that if both objects have the same taskId, it means they refer to the
same item, and the method returns true.
areContentsTheSame() is used to check whether the two objects have
the same contents, and it’s only called if areItemsTheSame() is true.
As Task is a data class, we can implement this method using:
Create TaskDiffItemCallback.kt
To create the new class, highlight the com.hfad.tasks package in the
app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File. Name
the file “TaskDiffItemCallback” and choose the Class option.
Once you’ve created the file, update its code so that it looks like this:
A ListAdapter accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback
argument
Now that we’ve defined TaskDiffItemCallback, we need to use it in
the adapter code. To do this, we’ll update TaskItemAdapter so that it
extends the ListAdapter class instead of RecyclerView.Adapter.
ListAdapter is a type of RecyclerView.Adapter that’s designed
to work with lists. It provides its own backing list so that you don’t have to
define your own, and it accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback in its
constructor.
We’re going to specify that TaskItemAdapter is a type of
ListAdapter that provides its own List<Task>, and we’ll pass it an
instance of TaskDiffItemCallback. Here’s the code to do this:
A ListAdapter is a type of RecyclerView.Adapter that provides its own
backing list. It works well with DiffUtil.
We can simplify the rest of TaskItemAdapter’s code
Once TaskItemAdapter has been changed to extend ListAdapter,
we can remove its List<Task> data property, along with its setter.
This property is no longer needed because ListAdapters come with
their own backing list, so you don’t need to define your own.
We can also delete TaskItemAdapter’s getItemCount() method.
This was needed when the adapter extended RecyclerView.Adapter,
but ListAdapter provides its own implementation, so it’s no longer
required.
Finally, we need to update the adapter’s onBindViewHolder() method
so that instead of using:
val item = data[position]
to get the item at a certain position from the data property, it uses:
val item = getItem(position)
This gets the item at the specified position from the adapter’s backing list.
We’ll show you all of the code for this on the next page.
The updated code for TaskItemAdapter.kt
Here’s the updated TaskItemAdapter code; update the code in
TaskItemAdapter.kt to include all the changes shown here:
Populate the ListAdapter’s list…
The final thing that we need to do is pass a list of Task records to
TaskItemAdapter’s backing list.
Previously, we did this by making TasksFragment observe
TasksViewModel’s tasks property. Each time the property changes,
the fragment updates the TaskItemAdapter’s data property to the
tasks property’s new value.
Here’s a reminder of the code we used to do this:
Now that the adapter uses a backing list instead of the data property, we
need to use a slightly different approach.
…using submitList()
To pass a list of tasks to TaskItemAdapter’s backing list, we’ll use a
method called submitList(). This method is used to update a
ListAdapter’s backing list with a new List object, so it’s perfect for
this situation.
Here’s the new code that we need to add to TasksFragment (in bold),
which we’ll add on the next page:
When the adapter receives the new list, it uses the
TaskDiffItemCallback class to compare it with the old version. It
then updates the recycler view with the differences instead of replacing the
entire list. This approach is more efficient, and leads to a much smoother
user experience.
Let’s see what the updated TasksFragment code looks like.
The updated code for TasksFragment.kt
Here’s the updated TasksFragment code; update the code in
TasksFragment.kt to include all the changes shown here (in bold):
Let’s run through what happens when the app runs.
What happens when the code runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. When the app launches, MainActivity displays TasksFragment.
TasksFragment uses TasksViewModel as its view model.
2. TasksFragment creates a TaskItemAdapter object, and assigns
it to the recycler view as its adapter.
3. TasksFragment observes TasksViewModel’s tasks property.
This property is a LiveData<List<Task>> that holds an upto-date list of records from the database.
4. Each time the tasks property gets a new value, TasksFragment
submits its List<Task> to the TaskItemAdapter.
5. TaskItemAdapter uses TaskDiffItemCallback to compare its
old data with the new.
It uses TaskDiffItemCallback’s areItemsTheSame()
and areContentsTheSame() methods to figure out what’s
changed.
6. TaskItemAdapter tells the recycler view what’s changed.
The recycler view rebinds and redraws the necessary items.
Test Drive
When we run the app, TasksFragment displays a grid of cards in the
recycler view as before.
When we enter a new task name and click on the button, a new task card is
added to the recycler view, and the existing cards shuffle along to
accommodate it.
The recycler view behaves in this way because we’re using DiffUtil to
submit changes to it, instead of replacing the entire list.
BE the ListAdapter
A recycler view’s ListAdapter class has a backing list of Drinks. It uses
the Drink class shown on the right. Your job is to play like you’re the
ListAdapter, and say if the ItemCallback classes below will correctly
spot any changes when the ListAdapter is given a new list. Why? Why
not?
Answers in “BE the ListAdapter Solution”.
Recycler views can use data binding
Another way in which we can improve the Tasks app’s recycler view is to
make it use data binding.
As you may recall, TaskItemAdapter’s TaskItemViewHolder
inner class uses findViewById() to get a reference to the views for
each item in the recycler view. The view holder’s bind() method then
uses these references to add data to each view.
Here’s a reminder of this code:
If we change the recycler view to use data binding, we can remove the calls
to findViewById(), and make each view fetch its own data.
How we’ll implement data binding
We’ll make the recycler view use data binding in a similar way to how it’s
implemented with fragments. We’ll go through the following steps:
1. Add a data binding variable to task_item.xml.
We’ll add a <layout> element to the layout’s root, and create a
data binding variable named task whose type is Task. This will
generate a binding class named TaskItemBinding.
2. Set the data binding variable in TaskItemAdapter.
We’ll use TaskItemBinding to inflate each item’s layout, and
set its data binding variable to the Task object for that item.
3. Use the data binding variable to set the views data.
Finally, we’ll update task_item.xml so that each view fetches its
data from the layout’s Task object.
Let’s begin by defining the data binding variable.
Add a data binding variable to task_item.xml
We’ll begin by adding a <layout> element to task_item.xml’s root, and
specifying a data binding variable. Instead of using it to bind views to a
view model, however, we’ll specify that its type is Task.
Here’s the code to do this: update task_item.xml to include these changes (in
bold):
Making task_item.xml’s root element a <layout> tells Android that you
want to use data binding with it, so it generates a new binding class named
TaskItemBinding. We’ll use this class to inflate the above layout, and
set its task data binding variable to a Task object.
The layout gets inflated in the adapter’s view
holder code
When we first created the recycler view, we inflated the layout file
task_item.xml in TaskItemAdapter’s TaskItemViewHolder inner
class. We now need to change this code so that it works with the binding
class TaskItemBinding. Before we begin, here’s a reminder of the
current code.
BRAIN POWER
Look at the above TaskItemViewHolder code. What changes do
you think we need to make in order to bind task_item.xml to a Task
object?
Use the binding class to inflate the layout
The first change that we’ll make to TaskItemViewHolder is to inflate
task_item.xml using the TaskItemBinding class. We’ll do this in the
view holder’s inflateFrom() method like so:
Notice that we’re now passing the binding variable—a
TaskItemBinding object—to TaskItemViewHolder’s constructor.
This means that we also need to update TaskItemViewHolder’s class
definition so that it looks like this:
Set the layout’s data binding variable to a Task
Now that we’ve used the TaskItemBinding class to inflate
task_item.xml, we can use it to set the task data binding variable. To do
this, we’ll change TaskItemViewHolder’s bind() method so that it
sets task to the recycler view’s current Task item like so:
We’ve removed the lines that set the layout’s task_name and
task_done views because with data binding, these are no longer needed.
This means we can also remove the taskName and taskDone properties
from the view holder.
We’ll show you the full code for TaskItemAdapter (including its
TaskItemViewHolder inner class) on the next page.
The full code for TaskItemAdapter.kt
Here’s the updated TaskItemAdapter code; make sure that the code in
TaskItemAdapter.kt includes all the changes shown here (in bold):
Use data binding to set the layout’s views
Now that we’ve set task_item.xml’s task data binding variable to the view
holder’s Task item, we can use data binding to populate the layout’s views.
You’re already familiar with the code to do this. To set the task_name
view’s text to the name of the task, for example, we can use:
and to set the task_done checkbox, we can use:
We’ll show you the full code on the next page.
The full code for task_item.xml
Here’s the updated code for task_item.xml; update the code for this file so
that it includes all the changes shown here (in bold):
Let’s go through what happens when the code runs, and take it for a test
drive.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Why did we use a RecyclerView.Adapter in the previous
chapter? Could we have used ListAdapter instead?
A: We used a RecyclerView.Adapter in the previous chapter so
that you could get a feel for how recycler views fit together and work.
Using a ListAdapter is an extra refinement that works well with
DiffUtil, which is why we introduced it in this chapter.
Q: Can you use DiffUtil without implementing a
ListAdapter?
A: You can, but it’s more complicated. It’s easier to use
ListAdapter instead.
Q: Why are we replacing those calls to findViewById()?
A: findViewById() has a number of disadvantages, as we
discussed in Chapter 10.
First, it can be quite inefficient. Each time the method’s called, Android
has to search the layout’s hierarchy for a view with a matching ID. If it
doesn’t find one, the app will crash.
findViewById() isn’t type-safe either. If you specify an incorrect
type for the view you want to find, the app may crash when you try to
use it.
Q: Oh yes, I think I remember these disadvantages. And data
binding doesn’t have these problems?
A: No. Using data binding is safer because it means you’re much less
likely to experience these kinds of runtime errors.
Q: In task_item.xml you defined a data binding variable whose type
is Task. Why?
A: Because we wanted to display values from each item’s Task object,
and creating a variable of this type lets us set these values using data
binding.
What happens when the code runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. task_item.xml defines a Task data binding variable named
task.
As task_item.xml has a <layout> element at its root, a binding
class named TaskItemBinding is generated for this layout.
2. TasksFragment creates a TaskItemAdapter object, and assigns
it to the recycler view as its adapter.
3. TasksFragment submits a List<Task> to the TaskItemAdapter.
The List<Task> contains an up-to-date list of records from the
database.
4. TaskItemAdapter’s onCreateViewHolder() method is called for
each item that needs to be displayed in the recycler view.
onCreateViewHolder() calls
TaskItemViewHolder.inflateFrom(), which creates a
TaskItemBinding object. It inflates the object’s layout, and
uses it to create a TaskItemViewHolder.
5. TaskItemAdapter’s onBindViewHolder() method is called for
each TaskItemViewHolder.
This calls the TaskItemViewHolder’s bind() method,
which uses the TaskItemBinding object to set the layout’s
task variable to the item’s Task.
6. Data binding code in task_item.xml uses the task property to
set the views for each item.
The task_name view’s text property is set to
task.taskName, and the task_done view’s checked
property is set to task.taskDone.
Test Drive
When we run the app, TasksFragment displays a grid of cards in the
recycler view. It behaves in the same way as before, but this time, we’re
using data binding.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to implement data binding with a
recycler view, as well as how to utilize DiffUtil.
In the next chapter, we’ll build on this knowledge to make the recycler view
navigate to individual records.
Adapter Magnets
The Bits and Pizzas app includes a recycler view that uses a layout named
pizza_item.xml for its items. The layout defines a data binding variable
(named pizza) like this:
<layout...>
 <data>
 <variable
 name="pizza"
 type="com.hfad.bitsandpizzas.Pizza" />
 </data>
 ...
</layout>
The recycler view uses an adapter named PizzaAdapter, shown below.
See if you can complete the code for this adapter so that it sets the layout’s
pizza data binding variable.
package com.hfad.bitsandpizzas
import android.view.LayoutInflater
import android.view.ViewGroup
import androidx.recyclerview.widget.ListAdapter
import androidx.recyclerview.widget.RecyclerView
import com.hfad.bitsandpizzas.databinding.
...........................................
class PizzaAdapter
 : ListAdapter<Pizza, PizzaAdapter.PizzaViewHolder>
(PizzaDiffItemCallback) {
 override fun onCreateViewHolder(parent: ViewGroup, viewType:
Int)
 : PizzaViewHolder =
PizzaViewHolder.inflateFrom(parent)
 override fun onBindViewHolder(holder: PizzaViewHolder,
position: Int) {
 val item = getItem(position)
 holder.bind(item)
 }
 class PizzaViewHolder(val
binding:...............................)
 :
RecyclerView.ViewHolder(binding.root) {
 companion object {
 fun inflateFrom(parent: ViewGroup): PizzaViewHolder {
 val layoutInflater =
LayoutInflater.from(parent.context)
 val binding = ..................................

.inflate(.................................., parent, false)
 return PizzaViewHolder(binding)
 }
 }
 fun bind(item: Pizza) {
 ..................................=
..................................
 }
 }
}
Adapter Magnets Solution
The Bits and Pizzas app includes a recycler view that uses a layout named
pizza_item.xml for its items. The layout defines a data binding variable
(named pizza) like this:
<layout...>
 <data>
 <variable
 name="pizza"
 type="com.hfad.bitsandpizzas.Pizza" />
 </data>
 ...
</layout>
The recycler view uses an adapter named PizzaAdapter, shown below.
See if you can complete the code for this adapter so that it sets the layout’s
pizza data binding variable.
BE the ListAdapter Solution
A recycler view’s ListAdapter class has a backing list of Drinks. It uses
the Drink class shown on the right. Your job is to play like you’re the
ListAdapter, and say if the ItemCallback classes below will correctly
spot any changes when the ListAdapter is given a new list. Why? Why
not?
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 16 under your belt and now you’ve added DiffUtil
and recycler view data binding to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
Each time notifyDataSetChanged() is called, the
recycler rebinds and redraws every item.
DiffUtil figures out which items have changed, and updates
the recycler view in the most efficient way possible.
A ListAdapter is a type of RecyclerView.Adapter
that works with lists. It provides its own backing list, and
accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback in its constructor.
DiffUtil.ItemCallback calculates the difference
between two non-null items in a list.
Override the DiffUtil.ItemCallback’s
areItemsTheSame() method to specify whether two
objects refer to the same item.
Override the DiffUtil.ItemCallback’s
areContentsTheSame() method to specify whether two
objects have the same contents.
Use the submitList() method to submit a new version of a
list to a ListAdapter.
Recycler views can use data binding.
Define a data binding variable in the layout used for the
recycler view’s items.
Set the data binding variable in the recycler view’s adapter
code.
Chapter 17. Recycler View
Navigation: Pick a Card
Some apps rely on the user selecting an item from a list.
And in this chapter, you’ll learn how to make recycler views a core part
of your app design by making their items clickable. You’ll discover how
to implement recycler view navigation by making the app navigate to a
new screen each time the user clicks on a record. You’ll find out how to
show the user extra information about their chosen record, and update it
in the database. By the end of this chapter, you’ll have all the tools you need
to transform your awesome ideas into the app of your dreams…
Recycler views can be used for navigation
In the previous two chapters, you learned how to build a recycler view that
displays a scrollable list of data, and used DiffUtil to make it more
efficient. But this isn’t the end of the story.
Recycler views are a major component of many Android apps because, in
addition to displaying lists of data, you can use them to navigate through
the app. When the user clicks on an item in the recycler view, you can make
the app navigate to a new fragment, which displays further details of that
record.
To see how this works, we’re going to change up the Tasks app so that
when the user clicks on one of the tasks in its recycler view, it navigates to a
new fragment. This fragment will display the record that’s been selected,
and let the user update or delete it:
How the Tasks app is currently structured
Before we look at how we need to change the Tasks app, let’s remind
ourselves of its current structure.
The app is comprised of a single activity (MainActivity), which
displays a fragment named TasksFragment. This fragment is the app’s
main screen, and its layout includes a recycler view that displays a grid of
tasks. The recycler view uses an adapter named TaskItemAdapter, and
its items are arranged using the layout file.
TasksFragment uses a view model named TasksViewModel. The
view model is responsible for the fragment’s business logic, and gets its
data from a Room database using an interface named TaskDao.
Here’s how these components fit together:
We’re going to make the recycler view
navigate to a new fragment
We’re going to update the Tasks app so that when the user clicks on a task
in the recycler view, it displays a fragment named EditTaskFragment.
Here’s what the new fragment will look like:
As you can see, EditTaskFragment includes an edit text and a
checkbox that let the user edit the task. The edit text displays the name of
the task, and the checkbox shows whether the task has been completed.
The fragment also includes an Update Task button, which, when clicked,
updates the record in the database, and a Delete Task button, which deletes
the record. When either of these are clicked, the app navigates back to
TasksFragment, which displays an updated list of tasks in its recycler
view:
Here’s what we’re going to do
We’re going to build the new version of the app in the following three
stages:
1. Make items in the recycler view respond to clicks.
We’ll update the app so that when we click on a task in the recycler
view, its ID is displayed in a toast.
2. Navigate to EditTaskFragment when an item is clicked.
We’ll create EditTaskFragment, and use the Navigation
component to navigate to it when the user clicks on a task record.
We’ll display the task’s ID in the new fragment.
3. Display the task record in EditTaskFragment, and let the user
update or delete the record.
We’ll create a view model for EditTaskFragment, which will
use the TaskDao interface to interact with the database.
We’ll begin by making the recycler view respond to clicks.
Make each item clickable
The first change we’re going to make to the Tasks app is to make it display
a toast when the user clicks on one of the items in the recycler view.
We can make each item respond to clicks by adding an
OnClickListener to each item’s root view. To do this, we’ll call each
item’s setOnClickListener() method immediately after each item’s
data gets added to its layout.
The best place to add each OnClickListener is in the
TaskItemViewHolder’s bind() method, since this is where the
layout’s data binding variable gets set to a Task item. As you may recall,
the bind() method gets called by TaskItemAdapter’s
onBindViewHolder() method, which fires each time the recycler view
needs to display an item’s data.
Here’s the code to add an OnClickListener to the root view of each
item’s layout; we’ll add this to TaskItemAdapter.kt a few pages ahead:
Now that you know how to add an OnClickListener to each item, let’s
make it display a toast when an item is clicked.
Where should we create the toast?
To display a toast each time an item’s clicked, we could simply add the
following code (in bold) to the view holder’s setOnClickListener()
method:
This approach, however, would mean that we’d be putting code that
describes the app’s behavior in the view holder code. This code is
responsible for binding data to each item’s layout, so it’s not an appropriate
place for us to put this kind of code.
Adding the toast code to the view holder would also make the view holder
code less flexible. It would mean that each time the user clicks on an item,
it could only display a toast, and couldn’t be reused elsewhere.
So what’s the alternative?
We’ll make TasksFragment pass the toast code in a
lambda
An alternative is to define the code each item needs to execute in
TasksFragment, and pass it to TaskItemViewHolder—via
TaskItemAdapter—in a lambda. Doing so means that the fragment
controls what happens when an item is clicked instead of the view holder.
Before we look at the code, let’s run through how it will work.
How the code will work
Here’s what the code we’re going to write will do:
1. TasksFragment will pass a lambda to TaskItemAdapter’s
constructor.
The lambda includes the code to display a toast.
2. When the TaskItemAdapter’s onBindViewHolder() method is
called, it calls the TaskItemViewHolder’s bind() method, and
passes it the lambda.
3. The TaskItemViewHolder adds the lambda to each item’s
OnClickListener.
When the user clicks on each item (a CardView), it executes the
lambda and displays the toast.
So that’s how the code will work.
To implement this, we need to update the TasksFragment,
TaskItemAdapter, and TaskItemViewHolder code. We’ll begin
by updating the TaskItemAdapter and TaskItemViewHolder code
so that the adapter is able to accept the lambda, and pass it to the view
holder.
We’ll show you the code for this on the next page.
The full code for TaskItemAdapter.kt
Here’s the TaskItemAdapter and TaskItemViewHolder code;
update TaskItemAdapter.kt to include all the changes shown here (in bold):
We’ll pass a lambda to TaskItemAdapter
Now that TaskItemAdapter includes a lambda parameter in its
constructor, we need to pass one to it in the TasksFragment code where
it gets created.
As you may recall, TasksFragment creates a TaskItemAdapter
object in its onCreateView() method, which it then assigns to the
recycler view like so:
As we want to display a toast each time an item in the recycler view is
clicked, we can update this code so that it passes the following lambda to
TaskItemAdapter’s constructor:
The adapter passes the lambda to TaskItemViewHolder’s bind()
method, which uses the lambda in the OnClickListener code it assigns
to each item’s root view. When the user clicks on an item in the recycler
view, the lambda is executed.
You’ve now learned everything that you need to know to make an item in
the recycler view display a toast when it’s clicked. Let’s see what the full
code for TasksFragment looks like.
The full code for TasksFragment.kt
Here’s the updated TasksFragment code; make sure that the code in
TasksFragment.kt includes all the changes shown here (in bold):
Let’s see what happens when the code runs.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: In the TaskItemAdapter code, you defined the
clickListener argument’s type as (taskId: Long) ->
Unit. Can you remind me what that means?
A: It means that the argument can be passed a piece of code called a
lambda. The code accepts a Long argument named taskId, and
returns Unit.
Q: I see. So it’s really just a way of passing code to a method?
A: Yes. It means that we can make TasksFragment specify what
code should run, instead of hardcoding it in the TaskItemAdapter
code.
Q: Would adding it to the TaskItemAdapter code really be so
bad?
A: It would make the adapter code less flexible, and the app’s
components wouldn’t have such a clear separation of concerns.
Q: I think I’ve seen other ways of making a recycler view respond
to clicks. Are these ways wrong?
A: There are many different ways of making a recycler view respond to
clicks. We chose this approach because it’s pretty flexible, and easier to
learn than some other methods.
We suggest that you get to grips with the approach we’re using in this
chapter before exploring other approaches.
What happens when the code runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. TasksFragment creates a TaskItemAdapter object, and assigns
it to the recycler view as its adapter.
The fragment passes a lambda (named clickListener) to the
adapter, telling it to display a toast when it’s executed.
2. TasksFragment submits a List<Task> to the TaskItemAdapter.
The List<Task> contains an up-to-date list of records from the
database.
3. TaskItemAdapter’s onCreateViewHolder() method is called for
each item that needs to be displayed in the recycler view.
This creates a set of TaskItemViewHolders.
4. TaskItemAdapter’s onBindViewHolder() method is called for
each TaskItemViewHolder.
This calls the TaskItemViewHolder’s bind() method,
passing it the item that was clicked and the clickListener
lambda.
5. The TaskItemViewHolder’s bind() method adds an
OnClickListener to the root view of each view holder’s layout.
In this example, the root view is a CardView.
6. When the user clicks on an item in the recycler view, the
OnClickListener registers the click.
It executes the clickListener lambda, which displays a toast.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, TasksFragment displays a grid of cards in the
recycler view as before. If we click on one of the tasks, the app displays its
ID in a toast.
You’ve now learned how to make a recycler view’s items respond to click
events. We’ll use this knowledge to make the app navigate to a new
fragment when an item is clicked.
Before we do this, try the following exercise.
Adapter Magnets
The Bits and Pizzas app includes a recycler view that uses a layout named
pizza_item.xml to display Pizza objects. The Pizza data class looks like
this:
package com.hfad.bitsandpizzas
data class Pizza(
 var pizzaId: Long = 0L,
 var pizzaName: String = "",
 var pizzaDescription: String = "",
 var pizzaImageId: Int = 0
)
The recycler view uses an adapter named PizzaAdapter, shown below.
See if you can complete the code for this adapter so that when one of its
items is clicked, it executes a lambda that’s passed to the adapter in its
constructor.
Hint: The lambda should accept a pizzaId argument, and return Unit.
package com.hfad.bitsandpizzas
import android.view.LayoutInflater
import android.view.ViewGroup
import androidx.recyclerview.widget.ListAdapter
import androidx.recyclerview.widget.RecyclerView
import com.hfad.bitsandpizzas.databinding.PizzaItemBinding
class PizzaAdapter(val
clickListener:..................................................)
 : ListAdapter<Pizza, PizzaAdapter.PizzaViewHolder>
(PizzaDiffItemCallback) {
 override fun onCreateViewHolder(parent: ViewGroup, viewType:
Int)
 : PizzaViewHolder =
PizzaViewHolder.inflateFrom(parent)
 override fun onBindViewHolder(holder: PizzaViewHolder,
position: Int) {
 val item = getItem(position)
 holder.bind(item,........................)
 }
 class PizzaViewHolder(val binding: PizzaItemBinding)
 :
RecyclerView.ViewHolder(binding.root) {
 companion object {
 fun inflateFrom(parent: ViewGroup): PizzaViewHolder {
 val layoutInflater =
LayoutInflater.from(parent.context)
 val binding =
PizzaItemBinding.inflate(layoutInflater, parent, false)
 return PizzaViewHolder(binding)
 }
 }
 fun bind(item: Pizza,

................................................................)
{
 binding.pizza = item
 binding.root..............................
 ........................................
 .......................
 }
 }
}
Adapter Magnets Solution
The Bits and Pizzas app includes a recycler view that uses a layout named
pizza_item.xml to display Pizza objects. The Pizza data class looks like
this:
package com.hfad.bitsandpizzas
data class Pizza(
 var pizzaId: Long = 0L,
 var pizzaName: String = "",
 var pizzaDescription: String = "",
 var pizzaImageId: Int = 0
)
The recycler view uses an adapter named PizzaAdapter, shown below.
See if you can complete the code for this adapter so that when one of its
items is clicked, it executes a lambda that’s passed to the adapter in its
constructor.
Hint: The lambda should accept a pizzaId argument, and return Unit.
We want to use the recycler view to navigate
to a new fragment
So far, you’ve learned how to make items in a recycler view respond to
click events. When the user clicks on a task in the Tasks app’s recycler
view, for example, it displays a toast.
Next, we’re going to change this behavior so that when the user clicks on an
item, the app navigates to a new fragment (which we’ll create) and displays
the task’s ID. Here’s what the new version of the app will look like:
To get this working, we’ll use the Navigation component to navigate to the
new fragment, and the Safe Args plug-in to pass the fragment the task’s ID.
This means that we needs to update the project and the app’s build.gradle
files to include these components.
Update the project build.gradle file…
We’ll begin by updating the project’s build.gradle file so that it specifies
which version of the Navigation component we want to use, and adds a
classpath for the Safe Args plug-in.
To do this, open the file Tasks/build.gradle, and add the following lines (in
bold) to the relevant sections:
…then update the app build.gradle file
We also need to add the Safe Args plug-in to the app’s build.gradle file,
along with a dependency for the Navigation component.
Open the file Tasks/app/build.gradle, and add the following lines (in bold)
to the appropriate sections
Once you’ve made these changes, click on the Sync Now option to sync the
changes you’ve made with the rest of your project.
Now that we’ve enabled the Navigation component and the Safe Args plugin, let’s create the new fragment that we want the app to be able to navigate
to.
Create EditTaskFragment…
We’re going to create a new fragment named EditTaskFragment that
the app will navigate to when the user clicks an item in the recycler view.
To do this, highlight the com.hfad.tasks package in the app/src/main/java
folder, then choose File→New→Fragment→Fragment (Blank). Name the
fragment “EditTaskFragment”, name its layout “fragment_edit_task”, and
make sure the language is set to Kotlin.
We’ll update the code for EditTaskFragment and its layout a few
pages ahead. Before that, let’s create a navigation graph that will tell the
app how to navigate between the app’s fragments.
…and create a navigation graph
We’ll add a navigation graph to the project in the same way that we did for
the other apps we created.
Select the Tasks/app/src/main/res folder in the project explorer, and then
choose File→New→Android Resource File. When prompted, enter a file
name of “nav_graph”, choose a resource type of “Navigation”, and click on
the OK button. This creates a navigation graph named nav_graph.xml.
The navigation graph needs to describe how the user will navigate between
TasksFragment and EditTaskFragment. Here’s how the navigation
needs to work:
1. The app displays TasksFragment.
This is the first fragment the user needs to see, so it needs to be the
navigation graph’s start destination.
2. When the user clicks an item in TasksFragment’s recycler view,
the app navigates to EditTaskFragment.
TasksFragment will pass EditTaskFragment a Long
parameter containing the task ID for the clicked item.
3. When the user clicks a button in EditTaskFragment (which
we’ll add to the fragment later in the chapter), the app
navigates back to TasksFragment.
We’ll show you the full code for this on the next page.
Update the navigation graph
Here’s the full code for the navigation graph; update nav_graph.xml to
include the changes shown here (in bold):
Next, let’s link the navigation graph to MainActivity so that it displays
each fragment when we navigate to it.
Add a NavHostFragment to MainActivity’s
layout
To link the navigation graph we just created to MainActivity, we need
to add a navigation host to its layout, and tell it to use nav_graph.xml as its
navigation graph. This will let MainActivity display the correct
fragment as the user navigates through the app.
We’ll add the navigation host to the layout in the same way that we did in
previous chapters: by adding a NavHostFragment to
activity_main.xml’s FragmentContainerView. Update
activity_main.xml so that it includes the changes below (in bold):
That’s all the code we need to change for MainActivity’s layout. Next,
let’s make TasksFragment navigate to EditTaskFragment when
the user clicks an item in its recycler view.
Make TasksFragment navigate to
EditTaskFragment
Each time the user clicks on an item in TasksFragment’s recycler view,
we want the app to navigate to EditTaskFragment, passing it the ID of
the Task that was clicked.
One way of doing this would be to update the lambda that
TasksFragment passes to its TaskItemAdapter so that it includes
all the necessary navigation code like this:
As you can see, this uses the TasksFragmentDirections class
(generated by the Safe Args plug-in) to pass the item’s task ID to
EditTaskFragment, and navigate to that fragment.
This approach, however, means that we’re adding business logic—deciding
when TasksFragment should navigate to EditTaskFragment—to
the fragment code, instead of adding it to TasksViewModel. As you
learned in Chapter 13, the view model code should make this kind of
decision instead of the fragment.
To address this, we’ll use a similar approach to the one we used for the
Guessing Game app in Chapter 13. We’ll add a new live data property to
TasksViewModel, which will hold the ID for the task the user clicks on.
When this property changes value, TasksFragment will respond by
navigating to EditTaskFragment, passing it the ID.
Add a new property to TasksViewModel
We’ll begin by adding a new live data property to TasksViewModel that
specifies the task ID that TasksFragment needs to pass to
EditTaskFragment. We’ll name this property navigateToTask,
and define it using the following code (we’ll add this to TasksViewModel.kt
on the next page):
As you can see, the navigateToTask property uses a mutable backing
property marked as private, which means that only TasksViewModel
can set it. This protects the property from unwanted updates by other
classes.
Add methods to update the new property
Each time the user clicks on a task in the recycler view, we want
TasksFragment to navigate to EditTaskFragment, and pass it the
task’s ID.
To enable this, we’ll add two methods to the TasksViewModel—
onTaskClicked() and onTaskNavigated()—which will be used
to set the value of navigateToTask’s backing property.
onTaskClicked() will set the property to the task’s ID, and
onTaskNavigated() will set it to null.
Here’s the code for the two methods:
Those are all the changes we need to make to TasksViewModel. We’ll
show you the full code on the next page.
The full code for TasksViewModel.kt
Here’s the updated TasksViewModel code; make sure that the code in
TasksViewModel.kt includes all the changes shown here (in bold):
Now that we’ve updated TasksViewModel, let’s see what changes we
need to make to the TasksFragment code.
Make TasksFragment navigate to
EditTaskFragment
We need to update the code for TasksFragment so that when the user
clicks on a task, it navigates to EditTaskFragment, passing it the task’s
ID.
To do this, we’ll call TasksViewModel’s onTaskClicked() method
when the user clicks on a task, and navigate to EditTaskFragment
when its navigateToTask property gets updated to a new task ID.
Call onTaskClicked() when the user clicks a task
To call the onTaskClicked() method, we’ll pass the lambda below (in
bold) to TaskItemAdapter’s constructor:
Each time the user clicks on a task, the lambda will get executed: it will call
TasksViewModel’s onTaskClicked() method, setting the
navigateToTask property to the task’s ID.
Navigate to EditTaskFragment when navigateToTask
gets updated
To make TasksFragment navigate to EditTaskFragment, we’ll
make it observe TaskViewModel’s navigateToTask property. When
this property is set to a Long task ID, the fragment will navigate to
EditTaskFragment, passing it the ID. We’ll then set the
navigateToTask property back to null by calling the view model’s
onTaskNavigated() method.
Here’s the code to do this:
Let’s update the TasksFragment code.
The full code for TasksFragment.kt
Here’s the updated TasksFragment code; make sure that the code in
includes all the changes shown here (in bold):
We’ve now updated the code for TasksViewModel and
TasksFragment so that when the user clicks on a task in the recycler
view, TasksFragment navigates to EditTaskFragment and passes it
the task’s ID.
The next thing we need to do is display the task ID in
EditTaskFragment’s layout. Let’s do this now.
Make EditTaskFragment display the task ID
We’re going to make EditTaskFragment display the task ID by
updating the fragment’s layout and Kotlin code. We’ll add a text view to the
layout, and then use Kotlin code to retrieve the task’s ID and add it to the
text view.
We’ll begin by adding the text view to the fragment’s layout; update
fragment_edit_task.xml so that it matches the code shown here:
We also need to update EditTaskFragment.kt
Now that we’ve added a text view to EditTaskFragment’s layout, we
need to set its text to the task ID. To do this, we’ll add the following code to
the fragment’s onCreateView() method:
As you can see, this uses the EditTaskFragmentArgs class (generated
by the Safe Args plug-in) to get the value of the taskId argument that’s
been passed to EditTaskFragment. It then uses this to set the text
view’s text.
Let see what the full code for EditTaskFragment looks like.
The full code for EditTaskFragment.kt
Here’s the full code for EditTaskFragment; replace the code in
EditTaskFragment.kt so that it matches the code shown here:
Let’s go through what happens when the code runs.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: In the EditTaskFragment code, I see that you’re using the
findViewById() method to get a reference to the layout’s text
view. Why aren’t you using view binding or data binding?
A: We’re using findViewById() here because it’s the quickest way
of testing whether the task ID has been successfully passed to
EditTaskFragment.
We’ll update the code to use data binding once we’re sure this version
of the code works.
Q: When I tried to update my Kotlin code, Android Studio told me
that it couldn’t find the TasksFragmentDirections or
EditTaskFragmentArgs classes. Any idea why that might be?
A: These classes are generated by the Safe Args plug-in, so make sure
you’ve updated your build.gradle files to include it. Then double-check
your navigation graph to make sure EditTaskFragment accepts an
argument.
What happens when the code runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. TasksFragment creates a TaskItemAdapter object, and assigns
it to the recycler view as its adapter.
The fragment passes a clickListener lambda to the adapter,
telling it to call TasksViewModel’s onTaskClicked()
method when it’s executed.
2. TasksFragment submits a List<Task> to the TaskItemAdapter.
The List<Task> contains an up-to-date list of records from the
database.
3. TaskItemAdapter creates a set of TaskItemViewHolders, and
an OnClickListener is set to each view holder’s root view.
In this example, the root view is a CardView.
4. When the user clicks on a task in the recycler view, the
OnClickListener registers the click, and executes the lambda.
It calls TasksViewModel’s onTaskClicked() method,
which sets its _navigateToTask property to the ID of the task
that was clicked.
5. TasksFragment is notified that TasksViewModel’s
navigateToTask property—which uses _navigateToTask as its
backing property—has been updated.
It navigates to EditTaskFragment, passing it the value of the
navigateToTask property.
6. EditTaskFragment gets the value of the taskId that’s been
passed to it, and displays it in its layout.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, TasksFragment displays a grid of cards in the
recycler view as before.
When we click on one of the tasks, the app navigates to
EditTaskFragment, which displays the task’s ID.
You’ve now learned how to use a recycler view to navigate to a new
fragment, and tell it which item was clicked.
Next, we’ll update the Tasks app so that when the user clicks on an item,
EditTaskFragment displays the task’s complete details, and lets her
update or delete the record in the database.
We want to use EditTaskFragment to update
task records
We’ve now updated the Tasks app so that when the user clicks on a task in
the recycler view, it navigates to EditTaskFragment, which displays
the task’s ID.
What we really want, however, is for EditTaskFragment to display the
complete task record, and let the user update or delete it in the database.
To do this, we’re going to update EditTaskFragment so that it looks
like this:
The new version of the fragment will work as follows:
1. When the user clicks on a task in the recycler view,
EditTaskFragment displays its details.
It gets the task record from the database, and displays the task
name and whether it has been completed.
2. When the user updates the task’s details and clicks on the
Update Task button, the changes are saved.
It updates the record in the database, and navigates back to
TasksFragment.
3. When the user clicks on the Delete Task button, the task is
deleted.
It deletes the task record from the database, and navigates to
TasksFragment.
For each of these actions, the fragment needs to interact with the app’s
Room database, which means that it needs to use the TaskDao interface
we defined in Chapter 14. Before we update the app, let’s have a quick
reminder of what TaskDao does.
Use TaskDao to interact with database
records
As you learned in Chapter 14, you interact with records held in a Room
database using a DAO interface. The Tasks app, for example, includes a
DAO named TaskDao that lets us interact with task records.
Here’s a reminder of what the TaskDao code looks like:
As you can see, the interface includes methods to get one or more records
from the database, and suspendable coroutines to insert, update, and delete
records in a background thread.
We’ll create a view model to access TaskDao’s methods
We need to use TaskDao’s methods to let EditTaskFragment get a
task record from the database, update its details, or delete it. Instead of
adding the code for this to EditTaskFragment, we’ll create a new view
model (named EditTaskViewModel), which will take care of the
fragment’s business logic and data.EditTaskViewModel will access
TaskDao’s methods, and pass the results to EditTaskFragment.
Let’s go and create EditTaskViewModel.
Create EditTaskViewModel
To create EditTaskViewModel, highlight the com.hfad.tasks package in
the app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File.
Name the file “EditTaskViewModel” and choose the Class option.
The view model needs to get a task record…
The first thing that EditTaskViewModel needs to do is get a task record
from the app’s database so that it can be displayed in
EditTaskFragment’s layout. To enable this, we’ll pass the view model
two things in its constructor: a task ID to tell it which task to get, and a
TaskDao object that it will use to interact with the database.
We’ll also add a LiveData<Task> property to the view model (named
task), which we’ll set using TaskDao’s get() method. This will set
the property to the task record the user wants to see.
Here’s the code to do this; we’ll show you the full EditTaskViewModel
code a couple pages ahead:
…and include methods to update and delete the task
We’ll also add updateTask() and deleteTask() methods to
EditTaskViewModel, which EditTaskFragment will use to update
or delete task records. These methods will call TaskDao’s update() and
delete() coroutines like so:
Before we add this code to EditTaskViewModel, let’s see what else the
view model code needs to do.
EditTaskViewModel will tell
EditTaskFragment when to navigate
The final thing EditTaskViewModel needs to do is tell
EditTaskFragment when it should navigate back to
TasksFragment. To enable this, we’ll add a new
LiveData<Boolean> property (named navigateToList) to the
view model, along with a backing property named _navigateToList.
EditTaskFragment will observe navigateToList so that when it’s
value becomes true, it navigates to TasksFragment.
We’ll set _navigateToList to true in the view model’s
updateTask() and deleteTask() methods. This means that as soon
as a task record has been updated or deleted, the app will navigate to
TasksFragment.
Here’s the updated code for these methods:
We’ll also add a new method to EditTaskViewModel named
onNavigatedToList(), which sets _navigateToList back to
false.
Here’s the code for this method:
We’ll show you the entire code for EditTaskViewModel on the next
page.
The full code for EditTaskViewModel.kt
Here’s the full EditTaskViewModel code; make sure that the code in
EditTaskViewModel.kt includes all the changes shown here (in bold):
That’s all the code we need for EditTaskViewModel. So what’s next?
EditTaskViewModel needs a view model
factory
The next thing we’ll do is define a view model factory named
EditTaskViewModelFactory, which EditTaskFragment will
use to create an instance of EditTaskViewModel. As you learned in
Chapter 11, a view model factory is needed for all view models that—like
EditTaskViewModel—don’t include a no-argument constructor.
Create EditTaskViewModelFactory
To create the factory, highlight the com.hfad.tasks package in the
app/src/main/java folder, then go to File→New→Kotlin Class/File. Name
the file “EditTaskViewModelFactory” and choose the Class option.
Once you’ve created the file, update the code in
EditTaskViewModelFactory.kt so that it looks like this:
Now that we’ve written the code for EditTaskViewModel and its
factory, let’s update the code for EditTaskFragment and its layout.
We’ll begin with the layout.
fragment_edit_task.xml needs to display the
task
We’re going to update fragment_edit_task.xml so that it includes an edit text
and a checkbox, which will be used to display Task data. We’ll use data
binding to bind these views to the taskName and taskDone properties
in EditTaskViewModel’s task.
We’ll also add two buttons to the layout, which will call
EditTaskViewModel’s deleteTask() and updateTask()
methods, and let the user update or delete the task record.
Here’s the updated code for the layout; update the code for
fragment_edit_task.xml so that it includes these changes (in bold):
We need to update EditTaskFragment.kt too
The final change that we need to make to the Tasks app is to update
EditTaskFragment’s Kotlin code. The code needs to do three things:
1. Set the layout’s viewModel data binding variable.
We’ll set it to an instance of EditTaskViewModel, which the
fragment will create.
2. Set the layout’s lifecycle owner.
This is so that the layout can interact with live data properties.
3. Observe the view model’s navigateToList property.
When this becomes true, the fragment will navigate to
TasksFragment, and call EditTaskViewModel’s
onNavigatedToList() method.
As you’re already familiar with all the code to do this, we’ll show you the
updated code for EditTaskFragment on the next page.
The full code for EditTaskFragment.kt
Here’s the full EditTaskFragment code: make sure that the code in
EditTaskFragment.kt includes all the changes shown here (in bold):
That’s everything that we need to make EditTaskFragment display a
Task in its layout, and let the user update or delete it. Let’s go through
what the code does when it runs.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: You said that the updateTask() and deleteTask()
methods in EditTaskViewModel use coroutines to update and
delete task records in a background thread. Is this necessary?
A: Yes. If you try to run potentially time-consuming database code like
this in the main thread, you’ll get compiler errors.
Q: Could I add Up button navigation to the app too?
A: Yes! This is a great idea, as it will give the user a simple way of
navigating from EditTaskFragment to TasksFragment without
making any record updates.
We’re not including the code to do this here, but by all means have a go
at adding it yourself. If you need a reminder of how to implement Up
navigation, we suggest referring back to Chapter 8.
What happens when the code runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. When the user clicks on a task, TasksFragment navigates to
EditTaskFragment, passing it the task ID.
2. EditTaskFragment gets a reference to its
EditTaskViewModel object.
3. EditTaskViewModel calls the TaskDao object’s get()
method, passing it the task ID.
4. The TaskDao’s get() method returns a LiveData<Task>,
which is assigned to EditTaskViewModel’s task property.
5. When the user clicks on the Update Task button, it calls
EditTaskViewModel’s updateTask() method.
This method uses TaskDao’s update() method to update the
record in the database.
6. When the user clicks on the Delete Task button, it calls
EditTaskViewModel’s deleteTask() method.
This method uses TaskDao’s delete() method to delete the
record.
7. The app navigates to TasksFragment.
Any changes that have been made to the task record are reflected
in the recycler view.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, TasksFragment displays a grid of cards in the
recycler view as before.
When we click on one of the tasks, the app navigates to
EditTaskFragment, which displays the task’s record.
When we make changes to the task and click on the Update Task button, the
changes are saved to the database and displayed in TasksFragment’s
recycler view.
That’s what happens when we try to update a task. What about when we
delete one?
When we click on a task, the app navigates to EditTaskFragment and
displays the task record as before.
When we click on the Delete Task button, the record is deleted from the
database. When the app navigates to TasksFragment, the record no
longer appears in the recycler view.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to build an app that uses a
recycler view to navigate to records, which you can then update or delete.
This technique gives you a powerful and flexible way of organizing the data
in your app.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 17 under your belt and now you’ve added recycler
view navigation to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
You can make a recycler view’s items clickable. You can use
this feature to make the recycler view navigate to another
fragment, which shows details of the clicked item.
You can make a recycler view respond to clicks by adding an
OnClickListener to the root view of the layout it uses for
its items.
You can tell the OnClickListener how to respond to
clicks by passing it a lambda. The lambda will get executed
when the OnClickListener registers a click.
The lambda can be defined in fragment code, and passed to the
OnClickListener via the adapter’s constructor.
Chapter 18. Jetpack Compose:
Compose Yourself
All the UIs you’ve built so far have used views and layout files.
But with Jetpack Compose, that’s not the only option. In this chapter,
we’re going to take a road trip to Composeville, and find out how to build
UIs using Compose components called composables instead of views.
You’ll learn how to use built-in composables such as Text, Image,
TextField, and Button. You’ll discover how to arrange them in Rows and
Columns, and style them using themes. You’ll write and preview your own
composable functions. You’ll even find out how to manage a
composable’s state using MutableState objects. Turn the page, and let’s get
composing…
UI components don’t have to be Views
So far in this book, you’ve learned how to use layout files and views to
build swish, interactive UIs. But while we’ve focused on this approach, it’s
not your only option.
An alternative is to build your UI using Jetpack Compose. Compose is part
of Android Jetpack; it’s an entire toolkit of libraries, tools, and APIs
designed to help you build native UIs with pure Kotlin code.
The great news is that using Jetpack Compose builds on your existing
Android knowledge. You can use view models and live data with Compose,
for example, and even add Compose components to existing UIs.
NOTE
You’ll find out more about this in the next chapter.
We’re going to build a Compose app
In this chapter, we’re going to introduce you to Compose by building a new
Temperature Converter app that converts temperatures from Celsius to
Fahrenheit. Here’s what the app will look like:
As you can see, the app uses several familiar looking components. The
main difference is that it’s written using Compose.
Before we start building the app, see if you can tell what Compose code
does by giving the following exercise a try.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL
We know we’ve not shown you any Compose code yet, but see if you
can figure out what each line in the code below does. We’ve completed
the first few to get you started.
SHARPEN YOUR PENCIL SOLUTION
We know we’ve not shown you any Compose code yet, but see if you
can figure out what each line in the code below does. We’ve completed
the first few to get you started.
Here’s what we’re going to do
Now that you’ve had a glimpse of some Compose code and seen what it
does, let’s run through what we’ll do in this chapter.
1. Create an app that displays two text items in a column.
You’ll create a new project that uses Compose to display some
hardcoded text. You’ll then convert the code into a composable
function, and learn how to preview it.
2. Make the app convert a temperature from Celsius to
Fahrenheit.
In this step, you’ll build a UI that lets you enter a temperature in
degrees Celsius. When you click a button, it converts the
temperature to Fahrenheit.
3. Modify the app’s appearance.
Finally, you’ll learn how to center components, use padding, and
apply a theme.
Let’s begin by creating a new project for the app.
Create a new Compose project
We’re going to create a new Android Studio project that will use Compose
for its UI. Create this project now by selecting the Empty Compose
Activity option:
Choosing this option adds a bunch of Compose libraries and code to your
project. It’s the best type of project to create if you want to build an
Android app from scratch with a Compose UI.
Once you’ve selected the Empty Compose Activity option, click on the
Next button to configure the project.
Configure the project
The next screen should look familiar to you, as it includes the same options
that you’ve used to configure projects throughout this book.
Enter a name of “Temperature Converter” and a package name of
“com.hfad.temperatureconverter” and accept the default save location.
Notice that the language is set to Kotlin, and can’t be updated. Compose
apps can only be created using Kotlin, so you can’t select a different
language.
Choose a minimum SDK of API 21 so that the app will run on most
Android devices. This is the oldest SDK that’s available for this type of
project, because Compose is only compatible with API 21 and above.
Once you’ve selected these options, click on the Finish button.
Compose UIs can only be created using Kotlin.
Compose projects have no layout files
When you create a project using the Empty Compose Activity option,
Android Studio creates a folder structure for you, populated with all the
files the new project needs. The folder structure looks like this:
Many of the files and folders should look familiar to you, as they’re the
same ones that get generated for projects that don’t use Compose. It
includes an activity file named MainActivity.kt, for example, and a String
resource file named strings.xml.
The big difference is that Android Studio doesn’t generate any layout
files for you. This is because Compose projects use activity code to define
the screen’s appearance instead of layouts.
What Compose activity code looks like
When you use Compose, the activity code is responsible for the app’s
behavior and its appearance. For this reason, it looks slightly different from
the activity code you’re used to working with.
Let’s see what basic Compose activity code looks like. Open the package
com.hfad.temperatureconverter in the app/src/main/java folder, and open
the file MainActivity.kt (if it’s not already open). Then replace the code that
Android Studio generated with the code shown here:
Compose activities extend ComponentActivity
As you can see, the above activity doesn’t extend AppCompatActivity:
it uses ComponentActivity instead.
androidx.activity.ComponentActivity is a subclass of
Activity, and it’s used to define a basic activity that uses Compose for
its UI instead of a layout file.
Just like all the other activities you’ve seen, the activity overrides the
onCreate() method. Instead of calling setContentView() to inflate
the activity’s layout, however, it uses setContent(). This is an
extension function that’s used to add Compose components—called
composables—to an activity’s UI so they run when the activity gets
created.
Let’s see how this works by using Compose to add some text to the
activity’s UI..
Use a Text composable to display text
We’re going to make MainActivity display some text by adding a
Text composable to the call to setContent(). You can think of Text
as being the Compose equivalent of a text view. Simply specify the text you
want to show, and the activity displays it.
Here’s the code to add some text to MainActivity; update the code for
MainActivity.kt to include the changes below (in bold):
When this code runs, it displays the text at the top of the screen like this:
Now that you’ve learned how to display some hardcoded text with
Compose, let’s make it more flexible by adding the Text to a composable
function.
Use composables in composable functions
A composable function is a function that uses one or more composables to
define part of the UI.
To see how this works, we’ll define a composable function named Hello
that accepts a String argument for the user’s name. When the function
runs—or is composed—it will add the String to a Text composable,
which displays the text in the UI.
The code for the new Hello function looks like this:
As you can see, the function is annotated with @Composable. This
annotation is required for all composable functions. If you omit the
annotation, the code won’t compile.
Call the Hello composable from setContent()
Marking the function with @Composable doesn’t just specify that it uses
composables; it makes the function itself a composable, which you can
use in your code like any other sort of composable.
In the app we’re building, we want to display the Hello text in
MainActivity’s UI. We can do so by calling Hello from
setContent() like this:
When this code runs, it displays the text like this:
Most UIs have multiple composables
So far, you’ve seen how to run a single composable, but most of the time,
you’ll want to use multiple composables in the UI, or call the same
composable multiple times. If you wanted the app to say hello twice, for
example, you could run the Hello composable function twice with
different arguments like so:
Hello("friend")
Hello("everyone")
When you have a UI that includes multiple composables, you need to
specify how they should be arranged. If you don’t, Compose will stack the
composables on top of one another like this:
So how do you arrange composables?
You can arrange composables using Row or Column
Most of the time, you’ll probably want to arrange composables in rows or
columns, and Compose includes Row and Column composables that let
you do this. To arrange two Hello composables in a column, for example,
you’d simply add them to a Column composable like this:
Column {
 Hello("friend")
 Hello("everyone")
}
When the code runs, the composables are arranged in a column like this:
Let’s update MainActivity so that it produces this UI.
The full code for MainActivity.kt
We’re going to add the Hello composable function to MainActivity.kt, run
it twice, and arrange the results in a column.
Here’s the complete code for the file; update MainActivity.kt to include the
changes below (in bold):
Let’s take the app for a test drive and see what it looks like.
Test Drive
When we run the app, MainActivity is displayed. It includes two
Hello composables arranged in a single column.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to use Compose to create
MainActivity’s UI instead of adding views to a layout file.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Do I have to use Compose? Can’t I stick to using views and
layouts?
A: Even though Jetpack Compose is still relatively new, we think it has
a big future. It may even become the default way in which you build
Android apps, so we definitely recommend you learn how to use it.
Q: You said every activity that uses composables needs to extend
ComponentActivity or one of its subclasses. Does
ComponentActivity extend AppCompatActivity?
A: No. This might surprise you, but AppCompatActivity is a
subclass of ComponentActivity, not the other way around.
Q: I see. So does that mean that I can add composables to my
existing activity code?
A: Yes. You can even use composables and views in the same UI.
You’ll find out how this is done in the next chapter.
You can preview composable functions
Another feature of using composable functions is that you can preview
them within Android Studio without having to load the app onto a device.
You can preview any composable function so long as it doesn’t have any
arguments, and you can even use this technique to preview entire
compositions—UIs made up of composables.
A composition is a UI made up of composables.
You say you want to preview a composable function by annotating it with
@Preview. The following code, for example, specifies a composable
function named PreviewMainActivity that lets you preview two
Hello composables arranged in a column:
Add MainActivityPreview to MainActivity.kt
To see how previews work, let’s add the MainActivityPreview
composable function to MainActivity.kt. Update the file so that it includes
the changes shown here:
We’ll show you how to see the preview on the next page.
Preview composables with the Design or
Split option
You can preview any composable functions marked with @Preview by
selecting the Split or Design view of the activity file. Choosing Split lets
you see the code and preview side by side, and choosing Design just
displays the preview.
Here’s what MainActivityPreview looks like when we select the
Split option:
If you make changes to the composable function you’re previewing, you
need to refresh the preview before you can see what it looks like. Simply
click on the Build Refresh button in the preview’s top menu and you should
see the effect of your changes.
Now that you’ve learned how to preview composable functions, try the
following exercise.
You can preview any composable function that has no arguments.
Pool Puzzle
Your job is to take code snippets from the pool and place them into the
blank lines in the code below. You may not use the same snippet more than
once, and you won’t need to use all the snippets. Your goal is to create two
composable functions: one named TeamHello that accepts a list of names
and says hello to each person, and one named HelloPreview that
previews TeamHello and arranges its text in a column.
..............
fun TeamHello(names: List<String>) {
 for (name in names) {
 ..............("Hello $name!")
 }
}
..............(showBackground = true)
..............
fun HelloPreview() {
 ..............{
 TeamHello(listOf("Virginia", "Zan", "Katie"))
 }
}
NOTE
Note: each thing from the pool can only be used once!
Pool Puzzle Solution
Your job is to take code snippets from the pool and place them into the
blank lines in the code below. You may not use the same snippet more than
once, and you won’t need to use all the snippets. Your goal is to create two
composable functions: one named TeamHello that accepts a list of names
and says hello to each person, and one named HelloPreview that
previews TeamHello and arranges its text in a column.
Let’s make the app convert temperatures
So far, you’ve used Compose to display text, written some composable
functions, and learned how to preview them. But that’s not the end of the
story.
For the rest of this chapter, we’re going to take you deeper into Compose by
changing the app we’ve just built into one that converts temperatures from
Celsius to Fahrenheit. Instead of saying hello, it will ask the user for a
temperature in Celsius, and convert it when she clicks on a button.
Here’s what the app will look like; as you can see, it includes an image, a
text field that lets you enter data, a button, and some text:
What are you waiting for? Let’s get composing.
Add a MainActivityContent composable
function
We’ll begin by adding a new composable function to MainActivity.kt named
MainActivityContent that we’ll use for the activity’s main content.
We’ll add all the composables needed for MainActivity’s UI to this
function, and call it from setContent() and
PreviewMainActivity. This approach means that the activity’s
composition will be displayed both when we run the app, and in the
preview.
We’ll also remove the Hello composable function from the code as this is
no longer needed.
Here’s the updated code for MainActivity.kt; update the file to include these
changes (in bold):
Display the header image…
The first component we’ll add to MainActivityContent is an image
that appears at the top of the screen.
First, make sure that your project includes the folder
app/src/main/res/drawable (you’ll need to create it if it’s not there). Then
download the file sunrise.webp from tinyurl.com/hfad3, and add it to the
drawable folder.
…with an Image composable
You display an image in Compose using an Image composable. The basic
code looks like this:
The Image composable requires two arguments: painter and
contentDescription.
The painter argument specifies the image that should be displayed.
Here, it uses painterResource(R.drawable.sunrise) to display
the sunrise.webp drawable resource.
The contentDescription argument is a description of the image
that’s used for accessibility.
There are many other optional arguments you can use to control the image
appearance, and how it’s displayed. The following code, for example, sets
the image height to 180dp, makes it fill the available width, and scales the
image:
Now that you’ve seen how to add an image with Compose, let’s add one to
MainActivity.
Add an Image to MainActivity.kt
We’re going to add an image to MainActivity by defining a new
composable function (named Header) to MainActivity.kt that creates one.
We’ll run this from the MainActivityContent composable function
so that the image is added to the UI and the preview.
Here’s the updated code for MainActivity.kt; update this file to include the
changes below (in bold):
That’s everything we need to display an image in the composition, so let’s
move on to the next component.
Let’s display the temperature text
The next thing we’ll include is a composable function (named
TemperatureText) that converts a Celsius temperature to Fahrenheit,
and displays the result. We’ll call this function from
MainActivityContent so that it’s included in both the UI and the
preview.
You’re already familiar with the code to do this, so update MainActivity.kt
to include the changes below (in bold):
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run (or preview) the app, it displays an Image and Text in a
column. The Text correctly shows the value of 0° Celsius in Fahrenheit.
Now that we’ve made sure the TemperatureText function works with a
hardcoded temperature, let’s update it to a new temperature when the user
clicks a button.
Use a Button composable to add a button
You add a button in Compose using a Button composable. Button code
looks like this:
When you use a Button composable, you need to specify two things: its
click behavior, and what should be displayed on the button.
You specify its click behavior using the Button’s onClick argument.
This accepts a lambda that runs each time the user clicks the button.
You say what should be displayed on the Button using a separate lambda
that includes a composable. When the code runs, it adds the composable to
the Button. The above code, for example, passes the Button a Text
composable, so it creates a button with text on it.
Let’s write a ConvertButton composable function
We’re going to add a Button composable to the Temperature Converter
app that, when clicked, changes the temperature that TemperatureText
converts to Fahrenheit. To do this, we’ll write a new composable function
(named ConvertButton) that displays a Button. We’ll also specify
that it accepts a lambda argument that the function will use for the
Button’s click behavior.
Here’s what the code for the ConvertButton composable function looks
like; we’ll add it to MainActivity.kt a few pages ahead:
Now that we’ve written the ConvertButton function, let’s add it to
MainActivityContent so that the Button composable gets added to
the UI.
We need to pass a lambda to ConvertButton
To run ConvertButton from MainActivityContent, we need to
pass it a lambda that specifies what should happen when it’s clicked. The
code needs to look like this:
@Composable
fun MainActivityContent() {
 ...
 ConvertButton {
 //Code that runs when the button is clicked
 }
 ...
}
When ConvertButton is clicked, we want it to update the text displayed
by TemperatureText. If TemperatureText was a view, we could
update its text using code like this:
binding.textView.text = "This is the new text"
While this approach works with views, however, it doesn’t work for
composables. With composables, you need a different approach.
Composables and views work differently.
While views and composables let you display similar looking components
(such as text and buttons), they do this in different ways. A composable
isn’t a type of View, and a View isn’t a type of composable, so to interact
with composables, you need to do things a little differently.
To see how this works, let’s go through what happens when the UI is
composed during composition.
COMPOSITION UP CLOSE
When Compose first builds the UI, it creates a hierarchical tree of all
the composables that get called. When the following code runs, for
example:
Compose builds a tree of composables that looks like this:
Once a composable has been composed, it only gets redrawn—or
recomposed—when its inputs change. TemperatureText, for
example, is defined using the code:
@Composable
fun TemperatureText(celsius: Int) {
 val fahrenheit = (celsius.toDouble()*9/5)+32
 Text("$celsius Celsius is $fahrenheit Fahrenheit")
}
Because TemperatureText accepts a single argument named
celsius, it will only be recomposed when the value of celsius
gets updated. If you want TemperatureText to be redrawn with
new text, you need to update the value of its argument.
We need to change the value of
TemperatureText’s argument
As you’ve just seen, composables are recomposed when the values they
depend on get updated. This means that if we want TemperatureText
to display different text when the user clicks on ConvertButton’s
button, the lambda we pass to ConvertButton needs to update the value
of TemperatureText’s argument.
To do this, we’ll add a new celsius variable to
MainActivityContent, and pass its value to TemperatureText.
When the user clicks on the ConvertButton composable, we’ll get it to
update the value of celsius so that TemperatureText is recomposed.
A composable is recomposed when any of its inputs change their value.
Use remember to store celsius in memory
We’ll define the celsius variable by adding the following code to
MainActivityContent:
This creates an object whose type is MutableState, sets its value to 0,
and stores it in memory. You can think of celsius as working a bit like a
live data object. Each time it gets set to a new value, any composables that
use it are notified, and recomposed.
The object is stored in memory using remember. remember stores an
object when the composable that calls it—in this case
MainActivityContent—is first composed, and forgets it when the
composable is removed from the UI. This can happen when the user rotates
the device, and the activity—including its UI—is destroyed and recreated.
Just like a MutableLiveData object, you set a MutableState
object’s value by updating its value property. To set the value of
celsius to 20 when the user clicks on the ConvertButton
composable, for example, you’d use the following code:
ConvertButton { celsius.value = 20 }
In order for TemperatureText to respond to this value change, its
argument needs to be set to celsius.value like this:
TemperatureText(celsius.value)
Each time celsius.value gets updated, TemperatureText is
recomposed with the new value, which changes the text that’s displayed.
We’ll show you the full code over the next couple pages.
The full code for MainActivity.kt
Here’s the complete code so far for MainActivity.kt; update the file to
include the changes below (in bold):
Let’s run through what happens when the code runs, and take the app for a
test drive.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. MainActivity launches, and its onCreate() method runs.
It calls setContent(), which runs the
MainActivityContent composable function.
2. MainActivityContent creates a MutableState<Int> variable
named celsius, sets its value to 0, and stores it in memory.
3. MainActivityContent runs the Header, ConvertButton, and
TemperatureText composable functions.
It passes the value of celsius to the TemperatureText
composable function, which converts it to Fahrenheit.
4. The Header, ConvertButton, and TemperatureText composable
functions add an image, a button, and some text to the UI.
5. The user clicks on the ConvertButton composable in the UI.
This sets the value of celsius to 20.
6. TemperatureText is recomposed.
It converts the new value of celsius to Fahrenheit, and displays
the result.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, MainActivity is displayed. It includes an image,
a button, and some text that gives the value of 0° Celsius in Fahrenheit.
When we click on the Convert button, the text is updated to give the value
of 20° Celsius in Fahrenheit instead.
The next thing we need to do is let the user enter her own temperatures.
We’ll do this after you’ve tried the exercise on the next page.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: Did you say that remember stores an object in memory?
A: Yes—well remembered!
remember stores an object in memory when the composable that calls
it is first composed, and forgets about it when the composable is
removed from the UI. This can happen when the user rotates the device
screen because Android destroys and recreates the activity, along with
any composables.
Q: Can I persist a composable’s state when the screen is rotated?
A: For simple values, you can use rememberSaveable instead of
remember. This automatically saves any value that can be saved to a
Bundle.
Another option is to use a view model. We’ll show you how to use
composables with a view model in the next chapter.
Q: I’ve seen syntax like: var x by remember { ... } What
does this do?
A: It’s the same as using val x = remember { ... } except
you can replace x.value in your code with x. If you use this
approach, make sure you import
androidx.compose.runtime.getValue and
androidx.compose.runtime.setValue or the code won’t
compile.
Compose Magnets
Someone used fridge magnets to create a new composable function named
ChangeHello. The function displays some text that says “Hello friend”,
and a button that, when clicked, changes the text to “Hello everyone”.
Unfortunately a stray cat ran into the kitchen and dislodged some of the
magnets. Can you piece them back together again?
Compose Magnets Solution
Someone used fridge magnets to create a new composable function named
ChangeHello. The function displays some text that says “Hello friend”,
and a button that, when clicked, changes the text to “Hello everyone”.
Unfortunately a stray cat ran into the kitchen and dislodged some of the
magnets. Can you piece them back together again?
Let the user enter a temperature
So far, you’ve built a version of the Temperature Converter app that
converts a hardcoded temperature from Celsius to Fahrenheit. When the
user clicks on a button, it changes the temperature that’s being converted to
another value.
What we really want to do is let the user convert her own temperatures, so
the next thing we’ll do is add a text field to the UI. The user will enter a
Celsius temperature into the text field, and when she clicks the button, the
app will convert it to Fahrenheit and display the result:
We’ll use a TextField composable
We’ll add a text field to the UI using a TextField composable. You can
think of this type of composable as the Compose equivalent of an
EditText.
You add a TextField using code like this:
The value attribute is used for the TextField’s value, and in this
example, it uses a MutableState variable named text to store this
value in memory.
The onValueChange attribute uses a lambda to update the value of the
text variable when the user enters text.
The label attribute provides the TextField’s label. It’s displayed in the
text area when the TextField is empty, and moves out of the way when
the user enters text.
Now that you’ve seen what text field code looks like, let’s add one to the
app.
Add a TextField to a composable function
We’ll add a TextField to the UI by creating a new
EnterTemperature composable function, which we’ll call from
MainActivityContent.
Here’s what the code for the EnterTemperature function looks like:
As you can see, the function accepts two arguments: a String for the
TextField’s value, and a lambda that specifies what should happen when
the user enters a new value.
Call the function in MainActivityContent
MainActivityContent needs to pass both arguments to
EnterTemperature when it runs the function, so we’ll use a new
MutableState object named newCelsius for its value, and update it
when the user enters text.
We’ll also change the lambda that’s passed to ConvertButton so that it
updates the value of celsius when the user enters a valid Int; this will
recompose TemperatureText when the user enters a new temperature.
Here’s what the code looks like; we’ll update MainActivity.kt on the next
page:
The full code for MainActivity.kt
Here’s the code for MainActivity.kt; update the file to include the changes
below (in bold):
Let’s see what happens when the code runs.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. When MainActivityContent runs, it creates a
MutableState<Int> variable named celsius, and a
MutableState<String> named newCelsius.
It sets celsius to 0 and newCelsius to "" and stores both in
memory.
2. MainActivityContent runs the EnterTemperature, Header,
ConvertButton, and TemperatureText composable functions.
It passes the value of celsius to the TemperatureText
composable function, which converts it to Fahrenheit.
3. The Header, EnterTemperature, ConvertButton, and
TemperatureText composable functions add an image, a text
field, a button, and some text to the UI.
4. The user enters a new value into EnterTemperature (in this
example “25”).
EnterTemperature sets newCelsius to this value.
5. The user clicks on the ConvertButton composable.
It converts the value of newCelsius to an Int, and assigns it to
celsius.value.
6. TemperatureText is recomposed.
It converts the new value of celsius to Fahrenheit, and displays
the result.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, MainActivity includes a text field.
When we enter a temperature and click on the Convert button, the app
converts the temperature to Fahrenheit and updates the temperature text.
The app now works in exactly the way we want. All that’s left is for us to
make some extra tweaks to its appearance.
We’ll tweak the app’s appearance
We’re going to change the app so that there’s a gap between the edge of the
screen and the UI components, and the button is centered horizontally.
We’ll also style the composables so that they use the default Material
theme.
Here’s what the new version of the app will look like:
We’ll make these tweaks over the next few pages. We’ll start by adding
some space around the edge of the UI.
Add padding to the Column composable
We want to add a gap between the edge of the screen and the app’s
components so that it looks like this:
We’ll do this by adding some padding to the Column composable.
Applying padding to composables has a similar effect to when you apply it
to views; it adds extra space around the component’s edges.
You add padding to a composable using a Modifier. Modifiers let you
decorate or add extra behavior to composables. To add padding of 16dp to a
Column composable, for example, you’d use the code:
Column(modifier = Modifier.padding(16.dp)) {
 ...
}
Modifiers are extremely flexible. You may remember, for example, that
when we wrote the Header composable function, we used a Modifier
to set the Image height and width like so:
Image(
 ...
 modifier = Modifier.height(180.dp).fillMaxWidth()
)
We’ll add padding to the app’s Column composable a few pages ahead.
Before we do that, let’s find out how to center the Button.
You can center composables in Columns or
Rows
If you want to center one or more composables, such as a Button or
Text, you can do so using Columns and Rows. There are a couple
approaches you can take, depending on what you want to do.
Center all of a Column’s content
If you want to align the composables in a Column so they’re all centered
horizontally, you can do so by making the Column as wide as possible,
then setting its horizontalAlignment argument.
To horizontally center all the composables in the Temperature Converter
app, for example, we’d add the code (in bold) to the Column composable:
Doing so makes the app look like this:
But what if you want to center just one of the composables?
Center the content of a single Row
If you want to horizontally center a single composable, you can do so by
placing it in a Row. Simply modify the Row to make it as wide as possible,
then set its horizontalArrangement attribute.
To horizontally center the ConvertButton composable, for example, we
could put it in a Row, and center it like this:
Doing so centers the button like this:
That’s how you use Columns and Rows to align and arrange composables.
Before we update MainActivity.kt, there’s just one final thing we need to
discuss: how to apply themes to composables.
Applying themes: revisited
As you learned in Chapter 8, themes let you give your app a common look
and feel. You can use one to remove the default app bar, for example, or
change the app’s colors.
You already know that you can apply a theme by defining one in the app’s
style resource files, which you then refer to in AndroidManifest.xml. Doing
so applies the theme to the app, including any views. What this doesn’t do,
however, is apply the theme to any composables. To style these, you need to
use a different approach.
How to apply a theme to composables
If you want to apply a theme to a composition, you need to do so using
Kotlin code. The following code, for example, uses MaterialTheme and
Surface composables to apply a theme to MainActivityContent:
MaterialTheme is used to apply the default Material theme to
composables. In this case, it applies it to MainActivityContent and
the composables this function calls, such as TemperatureText and
ConvertButton.
The above code also includes a Surface composable, which is used to
style surfaces. It’s used to apply things like 3D effects and shadows.
If you want to override the default MaterialTheme, you can do so be
defining a new theme in Kotlin code. Android Studio usually adds extra
theme code for you when you choose the option to create a new project
with a Compose activity, so let’s take a look at this code and see what it
does.
Android Studio includes extra theme code
When we created the Temperature Converter project, Android Studio added
extra Kotlin files to define a new theme. These files are named Color.kt,
Shape.kt, Theme.kt, and Type.kt, and they’re located in the
app/src/main/java folder in the com.hfad.temperatureconverter.ui.theme
package.
The main file is Theme.kt, as it defines a new theme for the app. The
theme’s name is TemperatureConverterTheme, and its code looks
like this:
As you can see, the theme overrides the MaterialTheme colors,
typography, and shapes. If you want to tweak any of these, you can do so by
updating the files in the .ui.theme package.
How to apply the theme
Once you’ve defined a theme, you can apply it to the app’s composables. To
apply TemperatureConverterTheme to MainActivityContent,
for example, you’d use the following code:
The full code for MainActivity.kt
You now know everything that you need to tweak the UI’s appearance and
make it look exactly how we want.
Here’s the complete code for MainActivity.kt; update the file to include the
changes below (in bold):
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, MainActivity is displayed, and the UI looks
exactly how we want it to. There’s a gap between the UI and the edge of the
screen, the button is centered horizontally, and it uses the default Material
theme.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to build a UI using Jetpack
Compose instead of views.
In the next chapter, you’ll take this knowledge even further by learning how
to integrate composables into an existing View-based UI.
BE Compose
The composable function below includes a TextField, a Button, and a
Text. When the user enters a name in the TextField and clicks the
Button, the new name should be displayed in the Text. Your job is to
play like you’re Compose, and say if the fiunction works as intended. If
not, how would you change it?
@Composable
fun ChangeHello() {
 val name = mutableStateOf("friend")
 val newName = mutableStateOf("")
 TextField(
 value = newName.value,
 label = { Text("Enter your name") },
 onValueChange = { name.value = it }
 )
 Button(
 onClick = { name = newName }
 ) {
 Text("Update Hello")
 }
 Text("Hello ${name.value}")
}
BE Compose Solution
The composable function below includes a TextField, a Button, and a
Text. When the user enters a name in the TextField and clicks the
Button, the new name should be displayed in the Text. Your job is to
play like you’re Compose, and say if the function works as intended. If
not, how would you change it?
NOTE
Code changes are needed to make the function work as intended. We’ve added
these to the code below.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 18 under your belt and now you’ve added Jetpack
Compose to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
Jetpack Compose lets you build native UIs using pure Kotlin
code.
The UI is built using composables instead of views and layout
files.
Compose activities extend ComponentActivity.
Any composables run from setContent() will be
displayed to the activity’s UI.
A composable function is a function that uses one or more
composables. It needs to be annotated with @Composable.
You can preview composable functions with no arguments
using the @Preview annotation.
Use Text to display text.
Use Row and Column to arrange composables in rows and
columns.
Use Image to display an image.
Use Button to display a button.
A composable is only recomposed when any values it depends
on are updated.
Use remember to store an object in memory.
Use mutableStateOf() to create a MutableState
object whose values can be updated.
Use TextField to display a text field.
Use a Modifier to decorate a composable or add behavior.
Use Columns and Rows to center composables.
Use MaterialTheme to apply the default Material theme to
composables.
You can override the default theme by creating a new one in
Kotlin code, and applying it to the UI.
Use Surface to style surfaces and apply 3D effects.
Chapter 19. Integrating
Compose with views: Perfect
Harmony
You get the best results when things work together.
So far, you’ve learned how to build a UI using views or composables. But
what if you want to use both? In this chapter, you’ll find out how to get the
best of both worlds by adding composables to a View-based UI. You’ll
discover techniques for making composables work with view models.
You’ll even find out how to make them respond to LiveData updates. By
the end of the chapter, you’ll have all the tools you need to use
composables with views, or even migrate to a pure Compose UI.
You can add composables to View-based UIs
In the previous chapter, you learned how to implement a Compose UI by
building a brand new Temperature Converter app. Instead of adding views
to a layout file, you created the UI by calling composables in the activity’s
Kotlin code.
There are times, however, when you might want to use views and
composables in the same UI. This may be because you want to use
components that are only available as views or composables, for example,
or you want to migrate parts of your app to Compose.
The great news is that you can add composables to a UI that’s defined in a
layout file. We’ll show you how this is done by taking the Guessing Game
app we created earlier in the book, and migrating it to Compose.
The Guessing Game app revisited
As we’re sure you remember, the Guessing Game app lets the user guess
which letters are included in a secret word. She wins the game if she
guesses all the letters, and loses if she runs out of lives.
Here’s what the game currently looks like:
Before we start replacing the app’s views with composables, let’s quickly
review how the app is constructed.
The Guessing Game app structure
The Guessing Game app uses two fragments for its UI: GameFragment
and ResultFragment.
GameFragment is the app’s main screen, which the user interacts with to
play the game. It displays information—such as the number of lives left and
any incorrect guesses the user has made—and lets the user make guesses. It
also includes a button that, when clicked, lets the user immediately finish
the game without making any more guesses.
ResultFragment is displayed when the game is over. It shows the user
if she has won or lost the game, along with the secret word.
The app also include two view models—GameViewModel and
ResultViewModel—which hold the app’s game logic and data, and
maintain its state when the app is rotated. GameFragment uses
GameViewModel, and ResultFragment uses ResultViewModel:
Let’s run through the steps we’ll take to update the app.
Here’s what we’re going to do
We’re going to replace the Guessing Game app’s views with composables
in two main steps:
1. Replace ResultFragment’s views with composables.
We’ll add the Compose libraries to the app’s build.gradle files, and
then add composables to ResultFragment’s layout to replicate
the current views. When we’re satisfied that the composables do
what we want, we’ll remove the views from its UI.
2. Replace GameFragment’s views with composables.
We’ll then go through a similar process for GameFragment.
We’ll add composables to its layout to reproduce its current views,
and when we’re certain that they work in the way we want, we’ll
remove the views from its UI.
Let’s start by adding the Compose libraries to the app’s build.gradle files.
Update the project build.gradle file…
We’ll first add a new variable to the project’s build.gradle file to specify
which version of Compose we’ll use. Open the file
GuessingGame/build.gradle, and add the line below (in bold) to the
buildscript section:
…and update the app build.gradle file, too
In the app’s build.gradle file, we need to add a bunch of Compose options
and libraries, and make sure the minimum SDK is 21. Open the file
GuessingGame/app/build.gradle, and add the following lines (in bold) to
the appropriate sections:
Once you’ve made these changes, click on the Sync Now option.
We’ll replace ResultFragment’s views with
composables
Now that we’ve updated the build.gradle files to include Compose, we can
start replacing the app’s views with composables. We’ll begin with
ResultFragment, as this is the simplest fragment.
As you may recall, ResultFragment’s layout includes a TextView to
display the game’s result, and a Button to let the user start a new game. It
looks like this:
We can replace these views with composables by using a Text composable
instead of the TextView, and a Button composable instead of the
Button view. This is what the new UI will look like:
We’ll build the new UI bit by bit so that at first, ResultFragment will
use both views and composables. Let’s begin by finding out how to add
composables to a layout file.
A ComposeView lets you add composables
to a layout
If you want to add composables to a View-based UI, you can do so by
adding a ComposeView element to the layout file. This is a type of view
that can display composables, and the code looks like this:
You can think of a ComposeView as a type of view that acts as a
placeholder for any composables you want to add to the UI in your Kotlin
code. When the app runs, it displays the layout’s views, and populates the
ComposeView with composables.
A ComposeView is a View that acts as a placeholder for composables. It
lets you use Compose in a View-based UI.
We’ll add a ComposeView to fragment_result.xml
We want to add Text and Button composables to ResultFragment’s
UI, so we need to add a ComposeView to its layout file.
Here’s the updated code for fragment_result.xml; update the file to include
the changes below (in bold):
Now that we’ve added the ComposeView, let’s add some composables to
it.
Add composables using Kotlin code
Once the layout includes a ComposeView, you can add composables to it
in the fragment’s onCreateView() method using code like this:
The code calls setContent() on the layout’s ComposeView, which
tells it what composables it needs to include. It then applies this to the
fragment’s inflated layout. If you wanted to add a Text composable to
ResultFragment’s layout, for example, you’d use the code:
Running this code would display the Text composable in the layout’s
ComposeView like this:
Add a composable function for the
fragment’s content
Now that you’ve learned how to add composables to a ComposeView,
let’s use the one we’ve added to fragment_result.xml to replicate its existing
views.
We’ll begin by adding a new composable function to ResultFragment.kt
named ResultFragmentContent, which we’ll use for the fragment’s
UI. We’ll call it from setContent() so that any composables we add to
it will run when ResultFragment gets displayed.
Here’s what the new code looks like; we’ll add it to ResultFragment.kt a
few pages ahead:
Reproduce the Start New Game button
Now that we’ve added the ResultFragmentContent composable
function to ResultFragment.kt, we can use it to add composables to the UI.
We’ll begin by adding a button.
ResultFragment currently includes a button View labeled “Start new
game” that uses the following OnClickListener to navigate to
GameFragment when clicked:
We can reproduce the button in Compose by creating a new composable
function named NewGameButton that we’ll run from
ResultFragmentContent. We’ll add a lambda argument to
NewGameButton so that ResultFragmentContent can tell it what
to do when it’s clicked.
Here’s what the new code looks like; we’ll add it to ResultFragment.kt a
couple pages ahead:
That’s the button sorted. What about the layout’s text?
Reproduce ResultFragment’s TextView
As you may recall, ResultFragment uses a TextView in its layout to
display the game’s result. It’s defined using this code:
Instead of using a TextView to display the text, we can define a new
ResultText composable function that displays the text in a Text
composable. We’ll add a String argument to ResultText that
ResultFragmentContent will use to pass it the text.
Here’s the new code; we’ll add it to ResultFragment.kt on the next page:
That’s all the code that we need to reproduce all of ResultFragment’s
views with composables. Let’s see what the code looks like.
The updated code for ResultFragment.kt
Here’s the updated code for ResultFragment.kt; update the file to include
the changes below (in bold):
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, GameFragment is displayed. When we click on its
Finish Game button, it navigates to ResultFragment.
ResultFragment displays the original views, and the composables we
just added. The Text composable displays the correct text, and the
Button composable navigates to GameFragment when it’s clicked.
The composables we added to ResultFragment work exactly how we
want them to, so the next thing we’ll do is remove the views.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: So ResultFragment’s views and composables are both using
the same view model. Is that right?
A: Yes. The view model has a property for the game’s result, and the
TextView and Text composable both refer to it.
Q: Do composables usually use a view model?
A: They often do, yes. Just like with a View-based UI, view models
provide a useful way of managing the state of any composables so they
don’t get reset when the user rotates the screen.
Q: You’re passing a view model to ResultFragmentContent as
an argument. Can’t the function just get a reference to the view
model?
A: Composable functions can get a reference to a view model using the
viewModel() function, but at the time of writing, the Compose
library it’s in isn’t stable. You can find out more about this—and other
features—in the appendix.
We need to remove ResultFragment’s
views…
You can remove a fragment or activity’s views in a couple ways:
1. By removing any views you don’t need from the layout file
This approach is useful if the UI contains a mix of views and
composables.
2. By removing the entire layout file
If the UI only includes composables, you can delete the layout file,
and remove any references to it in the activity or fragment’s Kotlin
code.
In the Guessing Game app, we’ve reproduced all of ResultFragment’s
views with composables, so we no longer need any of its original views.
This means that we can delete its layout file fragment_result.xml so that the
UI only includes composables.
…and update ResultFragment.kt
Before we delete the layout file, we first need to remove any references to
its views from ResultFragment.kt, and stop using view binding.
NOTE
View binding gives your activity and fragment code an easier way to access a layout
file’s views. As we’re removing ResultFragment’s layout file, it no longer needs to use
view binding.
We also need to tweak the fragment’s onCreateView() method so that
instead of inflating a layout file, it adds the composables to the fragment’s
UI.
As you learned in Chapter 18, you can do this with an activity by simply
calling setContent() from its onCreate() method like this:
When you’re dealing with a fragment, however, you need a slightly
different approach. To find out what this is and why, let’s revisit the
fragment’s onCreateView() method.
onCreateView() returns the UI’s root view
As you know, a fragment’s onCreateView() method gets called when
an activity needs to display the fragment’s UI.
When the UI is defined with a layout file, code in the onCreateView()
method inflates the layout into a hierarchy of views, and returns the root
view. The root view gets added to the activity’s layout, which displays the
fragment’s UI.
But what if there’s no layout file?
Return a ComposeView for Compose UIs
If the fragment’s UI is just made up of composables and has no layout file,
the onCreateView() method must still return a View?, or the code
won’t compile.
You deal with this by making the method return a ComposeView that
includes all of the UI’s composables. Here’s what the code for this looks
like:
When the activity needs to display the fragment’s UI, it calls the fragment’s
onCreateView() method as before. The method returns a
ComposeView that includes the fragment’s composables, which are then
displayed by the activity.
That’s everything you need to know to complete the code for
ResultFragment.kt. We’ll show you the full code over the next few pages.
The full code for ResultFragment.kt
Here’s the complete code for ResultFragment.kt; update the file to include
the changes below (in bold):
We can delete fragment_result.xml
Now that ResultFragment is no longer using its layout file, we’ll
remove any references to fragment_result.xml from the navigation graph,
and delete the layout file.
First, open nav_graph.xml in the app/src/main/res/navigation folder, and
remove the reference to "@layout/fragment_result" from the
ResultFragment section like this:
Then right-click on fragment_result.xml in the explorer, choose Refactor,
and then select the Safe Delete option. When you click on the OK button
and choose the option to do the refactor, the file is deleted.
Let’s go through what happens when we run the app.
What happens when the app runs
The following things happen when the app runs:
1. MainActivity launches and displays GameFragment in its
layout.
2. When the user clicks on the Finish Game button, or wins or
loses the game, the app navigates to ResultFragment and calls
its onCreateView() method.
3. The onCreateView() method creates a ComposeView.
4. The onCreateView() method sets the ComposeView’s content to
ResultFragmentContent.
5. When ResultFragmentContent runs, it calls the ResultText and
NewGameButton composables.
The composables are added to the ComposeView.
6. The onCreateView() method returns the ComposeView to
MainActivity.
7. MainActivity displays the ComposeView in its layout.
The ComposeView’s composables are displayed on the device.
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app and click on GameFragment’s Finish Game button,
it navigates to ResultFragment as before. This time, however, the UI is
just made up of composables.
That’s everything we need to make ResultFragment use a Compose UI.
Before we get to work on GameFragment, have a go at the exercise on
the next page.
THERE ARE NO DUMB QUESTIONS
Q: You said that a ComposeView is a type of View you can add
composables to. Is there a type of composable you can add Views
to?
A: Great question! Yes, you can use an AndroidView, which is a
type of composable that returns a View. It’s useful if you have a
Compose UI, and you want to add a component to it that’s only
available as a View, and not as a composable.
Pool Puzzle
Your job is to take code snippets from the pool and place them into the
blank lines in the code below. You may not use the same snippet more than
once, and you won’t need to use all the snippets. Your goal is to write the
code for a fragment named MusicFragment that has no layout file and
uses a composable function named MusicFragmentContent for its UI.
A theme named MusicTheme needs to be applied to the UI, including any
surfaces.
class MusicFragment : Fragment() {
 override fun onCreateView(
 inflater: LayoutInflater, container: ViewGroup?,
savedInstanceState: Bundle?
 ): View? {
 return
............................................................

...............................................................

..........................................................

.......................................................
 MusicFragmentContent()
 }
 }
 }
 }
 }
}
NOTE
Note: each thing from the pool can only be used once!
Answers in “Pool Puzzle Solution”.
Next we’ll make GameFragment use
composables too
Now that we’ve made ResultFragment use composables instead of
views, we can do a similar thing for GameFragment.
As you may recall, GameFragment’s layout includes TextViews,
Buttons, and an EditText to let the user play the guessing game.
Here’s a reminder of what it looks like:
Over the next few pages, we’re going to replace these views with
composables. Here’s what the new UI will look like when we’ve finished:
As before, we’ll begin by adding new composables to GameFragment’s
UI, which means we need to add a ComposeView to its layout. We’ll
show you the code for this on the next page.
We’ll add a ComposeView to
fragment_game.xml
Here’s the code to add a ComposeView to GameFragment’s layout;
update the file fragment_game.xml to include the changes below (in bold):
Now that we’ve updated the layout file, let’s start adding composables to it.
Add a composable function for
GameFragment’s content
Just as we did with ResultFragment.kt, we’ll add a new composable
function to GameFragment.kt that we’ll use for the fragment’s UI. We’ll
name the function GameFragmentContent, and call it from
setContent() so that any composables we add to it will run when
GameFragment gets displayed.
Here’s what the new code looks like; we’ll add it to GameFragment.kt a
few pages ahead:
Reproduce the Finish Game button
Just as we did with ResultFragment, we’ll add composables to the
GameFragmentContent composable function so that they’re displayed
in GameFragment’s UI. We’ll begin by reproducing the Finish Game
button.
The Finish Game button is defined using the following code in the
fragment’s layout:
As you can see, when the button is clicked, it calls GameViewModel’s
finishGame() method.
We can reproduce this in Compose by creating a new composable function
named FinishGameButton that we’ll run from
GameFragmentContent. Here’s what the new code looks like; we’ll
add it to GameFragment.kt a few pages ahead:
Reproduce the EditText with a TextField
The next view we’ll reproduce is the EditText that lets the user enter a
letter. We’ll create a new composable function named EnterGuess that
uses a TextField, and accepts two arguments: a String for the user’s
guess, and a lambda that specifies what should happen when the value
changes.
We’ll run the EnterGuess function from GameFragmentContent so
that it’s added to the fragment’s UI. We’ll also add a MutableState
object named guess to GameFragmentContent, which we’ll use to
manage the TextField’s state.
Here’s what the new code looks like; we’ll add it to GameFragment.kt a
couple pages ahead:
Reproduce the Guess button
Now that we’ve added a TextField to the UI that lets the user enter a
letter, we’ll add a Button composable that passes the letter to the view
model’s makeGuess() method.
We’ll add the Button using a new composable function named
GuessButton that we’ll run from GameFragmentContent. Here’s
what the new code looks like; we’ll add it to GameFragment.kt on the next
page:
We’ve now reproduced three of GameFragment’s views with
composables. Before we tackle the remaining ones, let’s update
GameFragment.kt and take the app for a test drive.
The updated code for GameFragment.kt
Here’s the code so far for GameFragment.kt; update the file to include the
changes below (in bold):
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, GameFragment is displayed. It includes all its
original views, along with three extra composables that let us make guesses
and finish the game.
When we use the EnterGuess and GuessButton composables to
guess which letters the secret word contains, the app registers each guess. If
we make a correct guess, the letter is added to the secret word display, and
if we make a wrong guess, the number of lives left is updated and the letter
is added to the list of incorrect guesses.
Now that we know the three composables we’ve added work, let’s tackle
the remaining ones.
We’ll display the incorrect guesses in a Text
composable
The next view we’ll reproduce is a TextView that uses live data to display
the user’s incorrect guesses. Each time the user makes a wrong guess, it
gets added to the incorrectGuesses property in the view model, and
the TextView responds by updating the text it displays.
Here’s a reminder of the TextView’s code:
We can replace the TextView with a Text composable so that it displays
the same text, but how do we make sure the text gets updated when the
incorrectGuesses property value changes?
Respond to LiveData using observeAsState()
As you learned in Chapter 18, composables are recomposed when any
State or MutableState objects they depend on get new values. This
doesn’t happen, however, for LiveData objects—like the view model’s
incorrectGuesses property. If you try to use a LivaData object’s
value with a composable, it won’t get redrawn when its value changes; it
will just keep using the object’s initial value, so it won’t stay up-to-date.
If you want to make a composable respond to LiveData updates, you can
do so using the observeAsState() function. This function returns a
State version of a LiveData object so that any composables that
depend on it are recomposed when its value changes.
You use the observeAsState() function with code like this:
This defines a variable (whose type is State) that observes the view
model’s incorrectGuesses LiveData property. It means that when
its value changes, composables can respond.
Let’s put this into practice by reproducing GameFragment’s incorrect
guesses TextView in Compose.
Create an IncorrectGuessesText composable
function
To reproduce the incorrect guesses TextView, we’ll define a new
composable function named IncorrectGuessesText. The function
will accept a GameViewModel argument, observe its
incorrectGuesses property, and use a Text composable to display its
value in the UI. Each time the property’s value gets updated, the Text will
be recomposed and display the updated text.
Here’s what the IncorrectGuessesText function looks like:
As you can see, the Text composable in the above code uses a function
named stringResource() to set its text. This function lets you use
String resources with composables, and pass arguments to them.
Run IncorrectGuessesText from GameFragmentContent
Just like the other composable functions we’ve created, we’ll add
IncorrectGuessesText to GameFragment’s UI by running it from
the GameFragmentContent composable function. The new code looks
like this:
We’ll update GameFragment.kt a few pages ahead. First, see if you can
piece together the code for the remaining two composables by having a go
at the following exercise.
Compose Magnets
Someone used fridge magnets to create two new composable functions
(named SecretWordDisplay and LivesLeftText) that reproduce
GameFragment’s two remaining views. Unfortunately some of the
magnets fell off when someone unleashed the kitchen kraken. Can you
piece the code back together again?
The SecretWordDisplay function needs to display the
secretWordDisplay LiveData<String> property from
GameViewModel. The LivesLeftText function needs to display the
lives_left String resource, and pass it GameViewModel’s
livesLeft LiveData<Int> property. Both functions need to be able
to respond to live data updates.
@Composable
fun SecretWordDisplay(viewModel: GameViewModel) {
 val display =
viewModel.secretWordDisplay..............................
 display..............................{
 Text(.......................................)
 }
}
@Composable
fun LivesLeftText(viewModel: GameViewModel)
{..............................
 val livesLeft = viewModel.livesLeft
 livesLeft..............................{

Text(............................................................
.........)
 }
}
Compose Magnets Solution
Someone used fridge magnets to create two new composable functions
(named SecretWordDisplay and LivesLeftText) that reproduce
GameFragment’s two remaining views. Unfortunately some of the
magnets fell off when someone unleashed the kitchen kraken. Can you
piece the code back together again?
The SecretWordDisplay function needs to display the
secretWordDisplay LiveData<String> property from
GameViewModel. The LivesLeftText function needs to display the
lives_left String resource, and pass it GameViewModel’s
livesLeft LiveData<Int> property. Both functions need to be able
to respond to live data updates.
The updated code for GameFragment.kt
You now know how to reproduce all of GameFragment’s views with
composables, so let’s add them to GameFragment.kt. Update the file to
include the changes below (in bold):
Let’s take the app for a test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, GameFragment includes all its original views, and
their Compose equivalents.
When we try to guess which letters the secret word contains, the text in the
SecretWordDisplay, LivesLeftText, and
IncorrectGuessesText composables is automatically updated.
We’ve now made sure that all of GameFragment’s composables work just
the way we want. All that’s left is for us to remove the fragment’s views.
Remove views from GameFragment.kt
Just as we did with ResultFragment, we’ll remove GameFragment’s
views by deleting its layout file. Before we can do this, however, we need to
remove any references to the views from GameFragment.kt. We’ll also stop
using data binding, as this is no longer needed.
Here’s the full code for the file; update GameFragment.kt to include all the
changes shown below (in bold):
Those are all the changes we need to make to GameFragment.kt so that it
doesn’t inflate its layout or reference any of its views.
As the fragment no longer needs to have a layout file, we can go ahead and
delete it after we’ve removed any references to it from the navigation graph.
We’ll do this on the next page.
Delete fragment_game.xml
The navigation graph includes a reference to the layout file
fragment_game.xml. We need to remove this before we can remove the
layout file.
Open nav_graph.xml in the app/src/main/res/navigation folder, and remove
the line that references "@layout/fragment_game" from the
GameFragment section like this:
Then right-click on fragment_game.xml in the explorer, choose Refactor,
and select the Safe Delete option. When you click on the OK button and
choose the option to do the refactor, the file is deleted.
We can also switch off data binding
One final change we can make to the Guessing Game app is to disable data
binding. As you may recall, we originally enabled data binding so that
views in fragment_game.xml and fragment_result.xml could interact with
each fragment’s view model. Now that we’ve deleted the layout files, data
binding is no longer required.
To switch off data binding, open the file GuessingGame/app/build.gradle,
and remove the data binding line from the buildFeatures section like
this:
When you’ve done this, click on the Sync Now option to sync the change
with the rest of the project.
Let’s take the app for a final test drive.
Test Drive
When we run the app, GameFragment is displayed. This time, its UI is
just made up of composables. They work exactly how we want them to.
Congratulations! You’ve now learned how to add composables to an
existing View-based UI, and even replace your UI with one that just uses
Compose.
We think Compose has a bright future ahead of it, and you can find out
more about it in the appendix. In the meantime, why not try adding
composables to some of the other apps you’ve built in this book?
Pool Puzzle Solution
Your job is to take code snippets from the pool and place them into the
blank lines in the code below. You may not use the same snippet more than
once, and you won’t need to use all the snippets. Your goal is to write the
code for a fragment named MusicFragment that has no layout file and
uses a composable function named MusicFragmentContent for its UI.
A theme named MusicTheme needs to be applied to the UI, including any
surfaces.
Your Android Toolbox
You’ve got Chapter 19 under your belt and now you’ve added
integrating Jetpack Compose to your toolbox.
BULLET POINTS
Apps can include a mix of View and Compose UIs.
Compose can be used in existing apps so long as the minimum
SDK is 21, and the language is Kotlin.
Before you can use Compose in an existing View-based UI,
you need to add Compose options and libraries to the
build.gradle files.
A ComposeView is a View you can add composables to.
You can think of it as a placeholder for any composables you
want to add to your layout file.
Composables can interact with a view model’s properties and
methods.
Use observeAsState() to make composables respond to
LiveData updates.
Once you’ve replaced an activity or fragment’s views with
composables, you can remove its layout file.
Leaving town
It’s been great having you here in
Androidville
We’re sad to see you leave, but there’s nothing like taking what you’ve
learned and putting it to good use. There are still a few more gems for you
in the back of the book and a handy index to study, and then it’s time to take
all these new ideas and put them into practice. Bon voyage!
Index
Symbols
?attr reference, A toolbar is a type of View
@array reference, Add the string-array to strings.xml
@ColumnInfo annotation, Specify a table name with @Entity
@Composable annotation, Use composables in composable functions
@Dao annotation, database access, Use an interface to specify data
operations, Add properties for any DAO interfaces
@Database annotation, TaskDatabase class, Create a TaskDatabase abstract
class
@Delete annotation, database access, Use @Delete to delete a record
@Entity annotation, data class, Specify a table name with @Entity
@Insert annotation, database access, Use @Insert to insert a record
@Preview annotation, composables, You can preview composable
functions
@PrimaryKey annotation, database table, Specify a table name with
@Entity
@Query annotation, database access, Use @Delete to delete a record
@string reference, activity_main.xml uses the String resource
@Update annotation, database access, Use @Insert to insert a record
_binding property, fragment, _binding refers to the binding object…
_gameOver backing property, GameViewModel, GameFragment still
includes game logic, You can use data binding to call methods
_navigateToList backing property, LiveData, EditTaskViewModel will tell
EditTaskFragment when to navigate
A
abstract class, for database, Create a TaskDatabase abstract class
actionMessageFragmentToEncryptFragment() method, Directions, Safe
Args generates Directions classes
actions, onCreateOptionsMenu() adds menu items to the toolbar
connecting fragments with, Connect fragments using an action,
MessageFragment needs to pass a message to EncryptFragment
in app bar, onCreateOptionsMenu() adds menu items to the toolbar
snackbar, Display the pizza order in a snackbar
activities, Welcome to Androidville, Activities and layouts form the
backbone of your app, Let’s refine the app
default, We’ve created a default activity and layout
in Compose, Compose projects have no layout files, What Compose
activity code looks like, Add a MainActivityContent composable
function
layout inflation, Your activity code tells Android which layout it uses
MainActivity.kt, The story so far, What the MainActivity code looks
like
view binding, The Stopwatch app revisited, Activity Magnets, ...and
the binding property provides non-null access to it, Activity Magnets
Solution
view model, How the app will be structured
Activity class, Welcome to Androidville, Your activity inherits the lifecycle
methods
activity lifecycle, The Activity Lifecycle: Being an Activity, Fragment view
binding code is a little different
activity magnets exercise, Activity Magnets
inherited methods, Your activity inherits the lifecycle methods
properties and methods, How do activities really work?
Chronometer, The activity code controls the stopwatch
exercise, Test Drive
onCreate() and onDestroy(), An activity’s states
onStart(), onStop(), onRestart(), The visible lifecycle
summary table, Your handy guide to the activity lifecycle
methods
states in, An activity’s states, There’s more to an activity’s life than
create and destroy
Stopwatch app, How do activities really work?
ActivityMainBinding class, Enable view binding in the app build.gradle
file, What the code does, Enable view binding for Bits and Pizzas
activity_main.xml file, Dissecting your new project, Introducing the key
files in your project, Let’s refine the app, We’ve created a default activity
and layout
adapter, recycler view, Why use a recycler view?, The adapter adds data to
the recycler view
attaching to recycler view, The full code for fragment_tasks.xml
creating file, The adapter adds data to the recycler view
data type property, Tell the adapter what data it should work with
exercises, Adapter Magnets, Adapter Magnets, Adapter Magnets
view holder, Define the adapter’s view holder
addTask() method, 2. Launch the insert() method in the background
TaskDao, 2. Launch the insert() method in the background
TasksFragment, Create TasksViewModel
TasksViewModel, We’ll use data binding to insert a record
AGDK (Android Game Development Kit), 7. Retrofit
aligning views, You can align views too, The chain will use three buttons
Android apps, Each screen is a fragment
(see also specific app projects)
activity states, Rotating the screen changes the device configuration
building, Let’s build a basic app
development environment, Android Studio: your development
environment
editors, Edit code with the Android Studio editors
folder and file structure, Dissecting your new project
interactive, Building Interactive Apps: Apps That Do Something
minimum SDK for, 3. Configure your project
package name for, Orientation can be vertical or horizontal
publishing, 10. Publishing your app
refining (editing), Let’s refine the app
running, How to run the app on a physical device
Android devices, Welcome to Androidville
adapting apps for different sizes of (see fragments)
API level on (see Android SDK (API level))
rotation of, Test Drive, Save the current state in a Bundle
running app on, How to run the app on a physical device
Android Game Development Kit (see AGDK)
Android Jetpack, Constraint layouts are part of Android Jetpack
AppCompatActivity (see AppCompatActivity class)
CardView (see CardView)
Compose (see Compose)
constraint layout (see constraint layout)
data binding (see data binding)
fragments (see fragments)
live data (see live data)
Navigation (see Navigation component)
recycler views (see recycler views)
Room (see Room persistence library)
view binding (see view binding)
view models (see view models)
Android platform, Getting Started: Diving In
getting started, Getting Started: Diving In
versions of (see Android SDK (API level))
Android SDK (API level), Android Studio: your development environment
device emulator, How to run the app on a virtual device
libraries for, Dissecting your new project
list of, 3. Configure your project
specifying for AVD, Select a system image
Android Sharesheet, Sharing data with the Android Sharesheet
Android Studio, Here’s what we’re going to do
adding Google repository reference, Use Gradle to include Jetpack
libraries
alternatives to, Let’s build a basic app
Compose, Create a new Compose project
creating projects, How to build the app
extra theme code, Android Studio includes extra theme code
fixing hard-coded text, Put text in a String resource file
installing, Android Studio: your development environment
system requirements, Install Android Studio
Android virtual devices (see AVDs)
AndroidManifest.xml file, Introducing the key files in your project
language settings, Orientation can be vertical or horizontal
location of, Orientation can be vertical or horizontal
theme in, Apply a theme in AndroidManifest.xml, Applying themes:
revisited
API level (see Android SDK (API level))
APK files, Compile, package, deploy, run
app bar, Android includes navigation UI components
attributes in manifest file for, Apply a theme in AndroidManifest.xml
default, Create a new project
label for, Apply a theme in AndroidManifest.xml
layout for toolbar animation, The app bar layout enables toolbar
animation
removing with theme, Replace the default app bar with a toolbar
replacing with toolbar, Replace the default app bar with a toolbar,
Replace the default app bar with a toolbar
themes required for, Apply a theme in AndroidManifest.xml
app folder, Introducing the key files in your project
AppBarConfiguration class, Configure the toolbar using an
AppBarConfiguration, Configure the toolbar’s drawer icon…
AppBarLayout, The app bar layout enables toolbar animation
AppCompatActivity class, What the MainActivity code looks like
in activity lifecycle, Your activity inherits the lifecycle methods
Jetpack, Constraint layouts are part of Android Jetpack
setSupportActionBar() method, Fragments don’t have a
setSupportActionBar() method
versus ComponentActivity, What Compose activity code looks like
apps (see Android apps)
areContentsTheSame() method, DiffUtil, We need to implement
DiffUtil.ItemCallback
areItemsTheSame() method, DiffUtil, We need to implement
DiffUtil.ItemCallback
Args class, EncryptFragment needs to get the argument’s value
argument constructor and view model factory, ResultViewModel needs to
hold the result
array resources, Strings and, Add values to the spinner
automated testing, 4. Automated testing
AVD Manager, Create an Android Virtual Device (AVD)
AVDs (Android virtual devices), How to run the app on a virtual device
B
back behavior, Secret Message app, What if the user wants to go back?
back stack, Welcome to the back stack
backing property (see private properties, marking)
barrierDirection attribute, Add a horizontal barrier
barriers, constraint layout, Create a movable barrier
base property, Chronometer view, The activity code controls the stopwatch
Beer Adviser app, Let’s build a Beer Adviser app
array resources, Add values to the spinner
creating project, Create the project
getBeers() method, Add the getBeers() method
responding to clicks, We need to make the app interactive
String resources, Put text in a String resource file
updating layout, We’ve created a default activity and layout, How to
edit a text view’s text
Beighley, Lynn, Use @Delete to delete a record
Head First SQL (O’Reilly), Use @Delete to delete a record
bias, views with, Views can have bias
bind() method, TaskItemViewHolder, Add data to the layout’s view,
Recycler views can use data binding, Make each item clickable
binding expression exercise, Binding-Cross
binding property, What the code does
ActivityMainBinding, How to add view binding to an activity
fragment, _binding refers to the binding object…, 2. Set the layout’s
data binding variable
binding variable, TaskItemBinding, Use the binding class to inflate the
layout
Bits and Pizzas app, The Bits and Pizzas app
(see also Material design system; view binding)
adapter magnets exercise, Adapter Magnets
chip buttons, A chip is a type of flexible compound button
collapsing toolbar, Let’s create a collapsing toolbar
exercises, Pool Puzzle, Adapter Magnets
FAB (floating action button), A FAB is a floating action button
radio button view, Choose a pizza type using a radio button
responding to clicks, Let’s make the FAB respond to clicks
scrolling toolbar, Create OrderFragment
blueprint tool (see constraint layout)
bottom navigation bar, Android includes navigation UI components, Most
types of UI navigation work with the Navigation component
activity code for, The full code for activity_main.xml, The updated
code for MainActivity.kt
as view type, A bottom navigation bar is a type of View
linking to navigation controller, Link the bottom navigation bar to the
navigation controller
menu resource file, The bottom navigation bar needs a new menu
resource file
replacing with navigation drawer, Let’s replace the bottom navigation
bar with a navigation drawer
SentItems Fragment, Create SentItemsFragment
BottomNavigationView class, A bottom navigation bar is a type of View
build folder, Introducing the key files in your project
build.gradle file, Use Gradle to include Jetpack libraries, Use Gradle to add
the Navigation component to your project
buildFeatures section, build.gradle file, Enable data binding in the app
build.gradle file
Bundle, Save the current state in a Bundle
get methods to retrieve values, Save the current state in a Bundle
onCreate() method, Save the state using onSaveInstanceState()
onSaveInstanceState() method, Save the state using
onSaveInstanceState(), Configuration changes revisited
put methods to add values, Save the current state in a Bundle
saving and retrieving activity state, The updated MainActivity.kt code
Bundle? parameter, The fragment’s onCreateView() method
Button composable, Use a Button composable to add a button, Reproduce
the Guess button
Button element, Material is used throughout Androidville
(see also FAB)
Button view, Add a button using the design editor
adding to constraint layout, Add a button to the blueprint
by syntax, Test Drive
calling method with data binding, Pool Puzzle, Pool Puzzle Solution
CompoundButton, Radio buttons are a type of compound button
finishing the Guessing Game, You can use data binding to call
methods
radio buttons, Choose a pizza type using a radio button
replacing view with composable, Reproduce the Start New Game
button
C
CameraX, 7. Retrofit
cardCornerRadius attribute, CardView, How to create a card view
cardElevation attribute, CardView, How to create a card view
CardView, Recycler view 2.0
adding library to, Recycler view 2.0
creating, How to create a card view
exercise, Pool Puzzle
CatChat app, How the CatChat app will work
(see also navigation UI)
bottom navigation bar, Most types of UI navigation work with the
Navigation component
navigation drawer, A navigation drawer lets you display many
navigation items
toolbar, Create a new project
toolbar navigation, Let’s use the toolbar to navigate
celsius variable, MainActivityContent, We need to change the value of
TemperatureText’s argument
centering composables, You can center composables in Columns or Rows
centering views, constraint layout, Use opposing constraints to center views
chains, constraint layout, Use a chain to control a linear group of views
checkableBehavior attribute, Highlight the selected item with groups
CheckBox button, Radio buttons are a type of compound button
checkedRadioButtonId property, Choose a pizza type using a radio button,
Add an OnClickListener to the FAB
chip group, compound button, Add multiple chips to a chip group
chip, compound button, A chip is a type of flexible compound button
Chronometer view, Stopwatch app, Create a new project
click response, We need to make the app interactive
Beer Adviser app, We need to make the app interactive
Bits and Pizzas app, Let’s make the FAB respond to clicks
Button composable, Use a Button composable to add a button
data binding, Use data binding to make a button call a method when
clicked
Navigation component, Add an OnClickListener to the button
recycler view navigation, Make each item clickable
Stopwatch app, The full code for MainActivity.kt
Tasks app, Add a new property to TasksViewModel
code editor, Edit code with the Android Studio editors, What’s in the
layout?, activity_main.xml has a new button
CollapsingToolbarLayout, Let’s create a collapsing toolbar, You can anchor
a FAB to a collapsing toolbar
color resource file, toolbar theme, Styles can override theme colors
Column composable, Most UIs have multiple composables, Add padding to
the Column composable
ComponentActivity class, What Compose activity code looks like, Use
composables in composable functions
composable functions, Use composables in composable functions
converter composables, Let’s make the app convert temperatures
exercises, Pool Puzzle, Compose Magnets, BE Compose, Compose
Magnets
GameFragmentContent, Add a composable function for
GameFragment’s content
replicating views, Add a composable function for the fragment’s
content
composables, What Compose activity code looks like
adding to layouts, A ComposeView lets you add composables to a
layout
adding to view-based UI, Integrating Compose with views: Perfect
Harmony, Pool Puzzle
Button, Use a Button composable to add a button, Reproduce the
Guess button
Column, Most UIs have multiple composables, Add padding to the
Column composable
hierarchical tree structure, We need to pass a lambda to ConvertButton
Image, Display the header image…, Add an Image to MainActivity.kt
Row, Most UIs have multiple composables, Center the content of a
single Row
Text, Use a Text composable to display text, Use a Button composable
to add a button, We’ll replace ResultFragment’s views with
composables, Add composables using Kotlin code, Reproduce
ResultFragment’s TextView
TextField, Let the user enter a temperature, Reproduce the EditText
with a TextField
versus views, We need to pass a lambda to ConvertButton
Compose, UI components don’t have to be Views
activity code in, What Compose activity code looks like
constraint layout library, 6. More Compose features
converter composable functions, Let’s make the app convert
temperatures
exercises, UI components don’t have to be Views
libraries for, Update the project build.gradle file…, 6. More Compose
features
using with views, Integrating Compose with views: Perfect Harmony
ViewModel library, 6. More Compose features
Compose Navigation, The Compose Navigation component
ComposeView, A ComposeView lets you add composables to a layout,
onCreateView() returns the UI’s root view, Next we’ll make
GameFragment use composables too
compositions, You can preview composable functions, We need to pass a
lambda to ConvertButton
CompoundButton subclass, Radio buttons are a type of compound button
configuration changes, view model’s handling of, Configuration changes
revisited
constraint layout, Constraint Layouts: Draw Up a Blueprint
adding button, Add a button to the blueprint
adding to layout file, Let’s add a constraint layout to activity_main.xml
aligning views, You can align views too
barriers, Create a movable barrier
chains, Use a chain to control a linear group of views
code for, Changes to the blueprint appear in the XML, The full code
for activity_main.xml, The full code for activity_main.xml
Compose library, 6. More Compose features
connecting multiple views, Most layouts need multiple views
deleting constraints, You can delete constraints you no longer need,
The chain will use three buttons
exercise, BE the Constraint
flows, A flow is like a multi-line chain
Gradle, Use Gradle to include Jetpack libraries
guidelines, Align views using guidelines
Jetpack, Constraint layouts are part of Android Jetpack
positioning views, Position views using constraints
single and multiple views, Here’s what we’re going to do
views with bias, Views can have bias
constraint widget tool, Remove constraints with the constraint widget
contentDescription argument, Image composable, Display the header
image…
contentDescription attribute, FrameLayout, Add an image to your project
contentScrim attribute, CollapsingToolbarLayout, How to add an image to a
collapsing toolbar
Context class, Your activity inherits the lifecycle methods
ContextWrapper class, Your activity inherits the lifecycle methods
ConvertButton composable function, Use a Button composable to add a
button, We need to change the value of TemperatureText’s argument, Add a
TextField to a composable function
converter composables, Let’s make the app convert temperatures
Button, Use a Button composable to add a button, Reproduce the
Guess button
header image, Display the header image…
TextField, Let the user enter a temperature, Reproduce the EditText
with a TextField
CoordinatorLayout, The coordinator layout coordinates animations between
views
coroutines, for data access in background, Database operations can run in
slooooow-moooo, Create EditTaskViewModel
create() method, ResultViewModelFactory’s override of, Create the
ResultViewModelFactory class
createChooser() method, Intent, Sharing data with the Android Sharesheet
D
DAO (Data Access Object), Use an interface to specify data operations
dark app bar, Define styles in style resource files
data binding, Data Binding: Building Smart Layouts
calling methods, You can use data binding to call methods
code for, The full code for fragment_result.xml, The full code for
fragment_game.xml, The full code for task_item.xml
switching off, Delete fragment_game.xml
TasksFragment, How the app will be structured, TasksFragment can
use data binding, We’ll bind the tasksString property to the layout’s
text view
using with recycler views, Recycler views can use data binding
versus view binding, Fireside Chats
data binding variable, setting, We need to set the gameViewModel variable
gameViewModel, We need to set the gameViewModel variable
resultViewModel, 1. Add <layout> and <data> elements
secretWordDisplay, Use the data binding variable to set the layout’s
text
Task, Add a data binding variable to task_item.xml
viewModel, TasksFragment can use data binding
data element, Add <layout> and <data> elements to fragment_game.xml
GameFragment layout, Add <layout> and <data> elements to
fragment_game.xml
ResultFragment layout, 1. Add <layout> and <data> elements
data property, A ListAdapter accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback argument
List<Task>, A ListAdapter accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback argument
recycler view adapter, Tell the adapter what data it should work with,
Add data to the layout’s view, We’ve added a recycler view to
TasksFragment’s layout, The data property’s setter calls
notifyDataSetChanged()
database (see Room persistence library)
delete() coroutine, TaskDao, Create EditTaskViewModel
delete() method, database access, Use @Delete to delete a record
deleteTask() method, EditTaskViewModel, Create EditTaskViewModel
density-independent pixels (see dp)
deriveSecretWordDisplay() method, SecretWordDisplay, Live data objects
use a value property
design editor, Edit code with the Android Studio editors, What’s in the
layout?
constraint layout, Introducing the constraint layout
opening, We’ve created a default activity and layout
XML changes reflected in, The XML changes are reflected in the
design editor
Design option, composable preview, Preview composables with the Design
or Split option
destinations, navigation graph, Add fragments to the navigation graph, Safe
Args generates Directions classes
device configuration, StopWatch app, Rotating the screen changes the
device configuration
dialogs, 3. Dialogs and notifications
DiffUtil utility class, Tell the recycler view what needs to change
implementing, We need to implement DiffUtil.ItemCallback
purpose of, Tell the recycler view what needs to change
DiffUtil.ItemCallback abstract class, We need to implement
DiffUtil.ItemCallback
Directions class, fragment, Safe Args generates Directions classes
distributing apps, 10. Publishing your app
dp (density-independent pixels), How to define a linear layout
drawable resource, Add an image to your project
DrawerLayout, How to create a navigation drawer, Configure the toolbar’s
drawer icon…
E
EditTaskFragment, We’re going to make the recycler view navigate to a
new fragment
code for, The full code for EditTaskFragment.kt
creating, Create EditTaskFragment…
displaying task ID, Make EditTaskFragment display the task ID
EditTaskViewModel, Use TaskDao to interact with database records
navigation graph, Create EditTaskFragment…
TasksFragment code to navigate to, Make TasksFragment navigate to
EditTaskFragment
updating layout, EditTaskViewModel needs a view model factory
updating task records with, We want to use EditTaskFragment to
update task records
EditTaskViewModel, The full code for EditTaskViewModel.kt
EditTaskViewModelFactory, EditTaskViewModel needs a view model
factory
EditText, LinearLayout, An edit text lets you enter text, Reproduce the
EditText with a TextField
Elvis operator, Live data objects use a value property
EncryptFragment, Each screen is a fragment, MessageFragment needs to
pass the message to a new fragment
back behavior, What if the user wants to go back?
code for, Update EncryptFragment.kt, The full code for
EncryptFragment.kt
creating, Create EncryptFragment…
Directions classes, Safe Args generates Directions classes
navigating from MessageFragment to, MessageFragment needs to
navigate to EncryptFragment
passing message from MessageFragment to, MessageFragment needs
to pass a message to EncryptFragment
retrieving value from MessageFragment, EncryptFragment needs to
get the argument’s value
String argument for, EncryptFragment needs to accept a String
argument
EncryptMessage, MessageFragment needs to pass a message to
EncryptFragment
enterAlways value, layout_scrollFlags attribute, Tell the toolbar how to
respond to scroll events
EnterGuess composable function, Reproduce the EditText with a TextField
EnterTemperature function, TextField composable, Add a TextField to a
composable function
entities attribute, @Database annotation, Create a TaskDatabase abstract
class
entries attribute, Spinner, Add the string-array to strings.xml
events, A button can listen for on-click events…
on-click, A button can listen for on-click events…
toolbar response to scroll events, Tell the toolbar how to respond to
scroll events
exercises, BE the Layout
Be the . . ., BE the Layout, BE the Constraint, BE the Activity, BE the
Safe Args Plug-in, BE the Menu, BE the View Model, BE the
ListAdapter
crosswords, Binding-Cross
Magnets, Activity Magnets, Layout Magnets, Activity Magnets,
Navigation Magnets, Activity Magnets, View Model Magnets,
Fragment Magnets, Layout Magnets, Adapter Magnets, Adapter
Magnets, Adapter Magnets, Compose Magnets
Mixed Messages, Mixed Messages
Pool Puzzle, Pool Puzzle, Pool Puzzle, Pool Puzzle, Pool Puzzle, Pool
Puzzle, Pool Puzzle
Sharpen your pencil, activity_main.xml has two elements, Test Drive,
How to add a scroll view, Pause the stopwatch if the activity’s paused,
BE the Safe Args Plug-in, Test Drive, Test Drive, The full code for
TaskDatabase.kt
What’s My Purpose?, The story so far, Add dependencies to the app
build.gradle file
Who am I?, Test Drive, Mixed Messages Solution
exportSchema attribute, @Database annotation, Create a TaskDatabase
abstract class
ExtendedFloatingActionButton, A FAB is a floating action button
F
FAB (floating action button), Material is used throughout Androidville
Bits and Pizzas app, A FAB is a floating action button
responding to clicks, Let’s make the FAB respond to clicks
snackbar, Pool Puzzle
view binding exercise, Test Drive, Activity Magnets Solution
fillViewport attribute, ScrollView, How to add a scroll view
findNavController() method, Get a navigation controller
findViewById() method, Get a reference to the button…
Fragment class’s lack of, Add an OnClickListener to the button
TaskItemViewHolder, Recycler views can use data binding
versus view binding, View Binding: Bound Together
finishGame() method, GameViewModel, Add finishGame() to
GameViewModel.kt, Reproduce the Finish Game button
FinishGameButton composable function, Reproduce the Finish Game
button
Fireside Chats, view binding versus data binding, Fireside Chats
floating action button (see FAB)
flows, constraint layout, A flow is like a multi-line chain
flow_horizontalStyle attribute, You can control the flow’s appearance
flow_wrapMode attribute, How to add a flow, You can control the flow’s
appearance
focus, activities having, What if an activity is only partially visible?
formatTasks() method, A LiveData<List<Task>> is a more complex type
Fragment class, What fragment code looks like, Add an OnClickListener to
the button
FragmentContainerView, You display a fragment in a
FragmentContainerView
navigation host, Add a navigation host to the layout using a
FragmentContainerView, Add a navigation host to activity_main.xml,
Add a NavHostFragment to MainActivity’s layout
OrderFragment display, Display OrderFragment in MainActivity’s
layout
FragmentOrderBinding class, Enable view binding for Bits and Pizzas
FragmentOrderBinding? type, _binding refers to the binding object…
fragments, Each screen is a fragment
(see also specific fragments for apps)
adding navigation host to display, Display the current fragment in
MainActivity’s layout
CatChat app, How the CatChat app will work
code for, What fragment code looks like, Fragment layout code looks
like activity layout code, The full code for WelcomeFragment.kt
creating for Guessing Game app, The Guessing Game app has two
fragments
layouts for, What fragment code looks like, Update
MessageFragment’s layout, BE the Layout
lifecycle, Fragments can access views from onCreateView() to
onDestroyView()
linear layout exercise, Pool Puzzle
live data, GameViewModel and GameFragment need to use live data
MessageFragment, Create MessageFragment
Navigation component, Navigate between screens using the
Navigation component, Use the Navigation component to navigate
between fragments
passing data between, Safe Args: Passing Information
updating views in layouts directly, The fragments update the views in
their layouts
updating views versus view model, The Guessing Game app revisited
view binding, Fragments can use view binding too (but the code’s a
little different)
view model, How the app will be structured, Fragment Magnets
WelcomeFragment, Add WelcomeFragment to the project
FrameLayout, A frame layout stacks its views
height, A frame layout stacks its views
order of views in, A frame layout stacks views in the order they appear
in the layout XML
OrderFragment, Create OrderFragment
scroll view, A scroll view inserts a vertical scrollbar
view attributes, Add an image to your project
width, A frame layout stacks its views
fromBundle() method, Args class, EncryptFragment needs to get the
argument’s value
G
GameFragment, How the app will be structured
adding views to, Update GameFragment’s layout
code for, The updated code for GameFragment.kt, The full code for
GameFragment.kt, Make GameFragment observe the new property,
The full code for fragment_game.xml, The updated code for
GameFragment.kt
composables instead of views, Next we’ll make GameFragment use
composables too
creating, The Guessing Game app has two fragments
data binding, GameFragment can use data binding too
function in game, Back to the Guessing Game app
GameViewModel, Add a view model dependency to the app
build.gradle file…
live data with, The fragments decide when to update views
passing of gameOver control to GameViewModel, GameFragment still
includes game logic, Make GameFragment observe the new property
removing views, Remove views from GameFragment.kt
response to view model property updates, The full code for
GameViewModel.kt
restricting properties, Fragments can update GameViewModel’s
properties
tasks of, Update GameFragment’s layout
GameFragmentContent composable function, Add a composable function
for GameFragment’s content, Reproduce the Finish Game button,
Reproduce the Guess button, Create an IncorrectGuessesText composable
function
gameOver property, adding to GameViewModel, GameFragment still
includes game logic
GameViewModel, Here’s what we’re going to do
adding gameOver to, GameFragment still includes game logic
code for, The full code for GameViewModel.kt, The full code for
GameViewModel.kt
creating, Add a view model dependency to the app build.gradle file…
data binding, GameFragment can use data binding too
finishGame() method, Add finishGame() to GameViewModel.kt
function in game, Back to the Guessing Game app
incorrectGuessesText composable function, Create an
IncorrectGuessesText composable function
linking to fragment, Create a GameViewModel object
live data with, The fragments decide when to update views, What
happens when the app runs, We need to set the gameViewModel
variable
protecting properties, Fragments can update GameViewModel’s
properties
ViewModelProvider, Create a GameViewModel object
gameViewModel data binding variable, We need to set the gameViewModel
variable
get() method, TaskDao, Create EditTaskViewModel
getAll() method, TaskDao, TasksFragment needs to display records,
TasksFragment needs to update TaskItemAdapter’s data property
getBeers() method, Beer Adviser app, Add the getBeers() method
getBoolean() method, Bundle, Save the current state in a Bundle
getInstance() method, database instance, Add properties for any DAO
interfaces, TasksViewModelFactory needs a TaskDao
getItemCount() method, TaskItemAdapter, Tell the adapter what data it
should work with, A ListAdapter accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback argument
getLong() method, Bundle, Save the current state in a Bundle
Google repository, adding reference to, Use Gradle to include Jetpack
libraries
Gradle build system, Introducing the key files in your project, Use Gradle
to include Jetpack libraries
gravity attribute, view, The gravity attribute controls the position of a
view’s contents, layout-gravity controls the position of a view within a
layout
GridLayoutManager, The layout manager gallery
group element, navigation drawer, Highlight the selected item with groups
guess, MutableState, Reproduce the EditText with a TextField
GuessButton composable function, Reproduce the Guess button
Guessing Game app, What the guessing game will do, The Guessing Game
app revisited, Back to the Guessing Game app
adding button, Add finishGame() to GameViewModel.kt
composables instead of views for, You can add composables to Viewbased UIs
data binding (see data binding)
gameOver property, GameFragment still includes game logic
live data (see live data)
protecting properties, Fragments can update GameViewModel’s
properties
structure, You can add composables to View-based UIs
view models (see view models)
GUI components, inherited from View class, activity_main.xml has a new
button
guidelines, constraint layout, Align views using guidelines, How to add a
flow
H
Head First C (O’Reilly), 7. Retrofit
Head First SQL (O’Reilly), Use @Delete to delete a record
Header composable function, Add an Image to MainActivity.kt
header layout, navigation drawer, Create the navigation drawer’s header
headerLayout attribute, NavigationView, How to create a navigation drawer
Help item, CatChat toolbar, Let’s use the toolbar to navigate
HelpFragment, CatChat app, Let’s use the toolbar to navigate
activity navigation to, onCreateOptionsMenu() adds menu items to the
toolbar
adding to menu, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
creating, Create HelpFragment
navigation graph, Add the fragments to a navigation graph
hint attribute, EditText, An edit text lets you enter text
horizontal barrier, constraint layout, Add a horizontal barrier
horizontal chain, constraint layout, Use a chain to control a linear group of
views
horizontal constraints, Position views using constraints
horizontalAlignment argument, Column composable, You can center
composables in Columns or Rows
I
icon attribute, menu item, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
icons, A FAB is a floating action button
floating action button, A FAB is a floating action button
navigation drawer, The drawer gets its items from a menu, We’ve
added a navigation drawer to the layout
id attribute, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
menu item, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
view, activity_main.xml has a new button
IDE, not using, Let’s build a basic app
IDs, action, Connect fragments using an action
image resources, Add an image to your project
adding, Add an image to your project
collapsing toolbar, How to add an image to a collapsing toolbar
Image composable, Display the header image…, Add an Image to
MainActivity.kt
ImageView, Add an image to your project, Create the navigation
drawer’s header, How to add an image to a collapsing toolbar
navigation drawer, Create the navigation drawer’s header
system image for AVD, Select a system image
WebP image format, Add an image to your project
InboxFragment, CatChat app, Let’s use the toolbar to navigate, Create
InboxFragment, Add the fragments to a navigation graph, We need to
configure the toolbar
incorrect guesses, GameFragment, String resources revisited
incorrectGuesses property, GameViewModel, GameViewModel and
GameFragment need to use live data, We’ll display the incorrect guesses in
a Text composable
IncorrectGuessesText composable function, Create an IncorrectGuessesText
composable function
incorrect_guesses text view, Use the data binding variable to set the
layout’s text, The layout can pass parameters to String resources
inflate() method, How to add view binding to an activity
ActivityMainBinding, How to add view binding to an activity
LayoutInflater, The fragment’s onCreateView() method
inflateFrom() method, Use the binding class to inflate the layout
TaskItemBinding, Use the binding class to inflate the layout
TaskItemViewHolder, Override the onCreateViewHolder() method
inflaters, layout, The fragment’s onCreateView() method
inputType attribute, EditText, An edit text lets you enter text
insert() method, tasks into database, Use @Insert to insert a record, Create
TasksViewModel
instrumented tests, 4. Automated testing
Intent message, 1. Sharing data with other apps
Intent Resolver, 1. Sharing data with other apps
internationalization (see localization, String resources)
isChecked property, Radio buttons are a type of compound button, Add
multiple chips to a chip group
isLost() method, Live data objects use a value property
item elements, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
menu, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
styles, Styles can override theme colors
J
java folder, Introducing the key files in your project
Jetpack (see Android Jetpack)
K
Kotlin, Welcome to Androidville, Here’s what we’re going to do
L
label attribute, Apply a theme in AndroidManifest.xml
application, Apply a theme in AndroidManifest.xml
TextField composable, Let the user enter a temperature
layout element, Add a data binding variable to task_item.xml
adding to task_item.xml, Add a data binding variable to task_item.xml
data binding, Test Drive
GameFragment, Add <layout> and <data> elements to
fragment_game.xml
ResultFragment, 1. Add <layout> and <data> elements
layout manager, recycler views, We need to display the recycler view, The
layout manager gallery
LayoutInflator class, The fragment’s onCreateView() method
layouts, Welcome to Androidville, Activities and layouts form the backbone
of your app, Let’s refine the app, Layouts: Being a layout
activity_main.xml, Dissecting your new project, Introducing the key
files in your project, Let’s refine the app, activity_main.xml has two
elements, We’ve created a default activity and layout
adding composables to, A ComposeView lets you add composables to
a layout
adding views to fragment, Update GameFragment’s layout
code for, activity_main.xml has two elements, activity_main.xml has a
new button
constraint (see constraint layout)
creating buttons, Add a button using the design editor
data binding (see data binding)
default, We’ve created a default activity and layout
editing, We’ve created a default activity and layout
exercises, activity_main.xml has two elements, Layout Magnets, BE
the Layout, Layout Magnets, Layout Magnets Solution
for fragments (see fragments)
FrameLayout, A frame layout stacks its views
in Compose, Compose projects have no layout files
inflation of, Your activity code tells Android which layout it uses
nested, …and a ViewGroup is a type of View, Nested layouts revisited
providing alternate, 5. Supporting different screen sizes
removing, We need to remove ResultFragment’s views…
Task record display, Tell the recycler view how to display each item…
tasks in creating, It all starts with a layout
view binding, Enable view binding in the app build.gradle file, Test
Drive
warnings in, There are warnings in the layout…
XML updating, Let’s update the layout XML
layout_anchor attribute, FAB, You can anchor a FAB to a collapsing toolbar
layout_anchorGravity attribute, FAB, You can anchor a FAB to a collapsing
toolbar
layout_behavior attribute, NestedScrollView, A nested scroll view makes
layout content scrollable
layout_collapseMode attribute, toolbar, How to create a plain collapsing
toolbar, How to add an image to a collapsing toolbar
layout_constraintTop_toBottomOf attribute, Constrain a button under the
barrier
layout_gravity attribute, A FAB is a floating action button
floating action button, A FAB is a floating action button
view, layout-gravity controls the position of a view within a layout
layout_height attribute, How to create a plain collapsing toolbar
collapsing toolbar, How to create a plain collapsing toolbar
FrameLayout, A frame layout stacks its views
LinearLayout, How to define a linear layout
view, activity_main.xml has a new button, The <LinearLayout>
element, Let’s update the layout XML
layout_margin attributes, view, Use margins to add space between views
layout_scrollFlags attribute, toolbar, Tell the toolbar how to respond to
scroll events, How to create a plain collapsing toolbar
layout_weight attribute, view, Make a view streeeeetch by adding weight,
You can change a view’s size
layout_width attribute, A frame layout stacks its views
FrameLayout, A frame layout stacks its views
LinearLayout, How to define a linear layout
SlidingPaneLayout, Use a SlidingPaneLayout
view, activity_main.xml has a new button, The <LinearLayout>
element, Let’s update the layout XML
LENGTH options for snackbar, Display the pizza order in a snackbar
libraries, Room Databases: Room with a View
(see also Room persistence library)
CardView, Recycler view 2.0
Compose, 6. More Compose features
location in project, Dissecting your new project
Material library, Create the Bits and Pizzas project
recycler view, Here’s what we’re going to do
LinearLayout, We’ve created a default activity and layout, Add a button
using the design editor, A closer look at the layout code
attributes, How to define a linear layout
building, Let’s build a linear layout
code for, The full linear layout code
editable text view, An edit text lets you enter text
exercise, Layout Magnets
gravity for view contents, The gravity attribute controls the position of
a view’s contents, layout-gravity controls the position of a view within
a layout
height of views in, How to add weight to one view
margins for view contents, Use margins to add space between views
order of views in, Add views to the layout XML
orientation, Orientation can be vertical or horizontal
weight of views in, Make a view streeeeetch by adding weight
List<Task> data property, TaskItemAdapter, Tell the adapter what data it
should work with, A ListAdapter accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback argument
ListAdapter class, A ListAdapter accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback argument,
BE the ListAdapter
listener binding, Use data binding to make a button call a method when
clicked
live data, Live Data: Leaping into Action
GameViewModel, We need to set the gameViewModel variable
protecting properties, Fragments can update GameViewModel’s
properties
recycler view navigation, Add a new property to TasksViewModel
setting up fragments’ use of, GameViewModel and GameFragment
need to use live data
versus coroutines, Database operations can run in slooooow-moooo
LiveData type, Fragments can update GameViewModel’s properties
LiveData<Boolean> property, EditTaskViewModel, EditTaskViewModel
will tell EditTaskFragment when to navigate
LiveData<List<Task>> object, Use getAll() to get all tasks from the
database
LiveData<String> version of tasks property, A LiveData<List<Task>> is a
more complex type
LiveData<Task> property, EditTaskViewModel, Create
EditTaskViewModel
lives text view, Use the data binding variable to set the layout’s text
livesLeft property, GameViewModel, The fragment observes the view
model properties and reacts to changes.
updating text, The fragment observes the view model properties and
reacts to changes.
updating value property, The value property can be null, Fragments
can update GameViewModel’s properties
using live data, GameViewModel and GameFragment need to use live
data
value options, Live data objects use a value property
lives_left String resource, String resources revisited, The layout can pass
parameters to String resources
localization, String resources, Put text in a String resource file
Log class, Test Drive
Log.i() method, Test Drive
Log.wtf() method, Test Drive
logcat, viewing, Test Drive
Lollipop, How to run the app on a physical device
M
MainActivity.kt file, Dissecting your new project, Introducing the key files
in your project
MainActivityContent composable function, Add a MainActivityContent
composable function, Add a TextField to a composable function, Applying
themes: revisited
make() method, snackbar, Display the pizza order in a snackbar
makeGuess() method, What happens when the app runs
GameFragment, What happens when the app runs
view model, Reproduce the Guess button
makeText method, toast, A toast is a simple pop-up message
margins, view, Use margins to add space between views, Remove
constraints with the constraint widget
Material design system, The CatChat app will use a Material theme
(see also navigation UI)
adding Material library, Create the Bits and Pizzas project
elements applied to, Material is used throughout Androidville
OrderFragment (see OrderFragment)
replacing app bar with toolbar, Replace the default app bar with a
toolbar
styling Temperature Converter app, We’ll tweak the app’s appearance
toolbar, A toolbar is a type of View
Material You, The CatChat app will use a Material theme
MaterialTheme, composables, Applying themes: revisited
MaterialToolbar class, A toolbar is a type of View
menu (see Navigation component)
menu attribute, A bottom navigation bar is a type of View
BottomNavigationView, A bottom navigation bar is a type of View
NavigationView, How to create a navigation drawer
menu resource file, The bottom navigation bar needs a new menu resource
file
bottom navigation bar, The bottom navigation bar needs a new menu
resource file
exercise, BE the Menu Solution
navigation drawer, The drawer gets its items from a menu
toolbar, Specify items in the toolbar with a menu resource file,
onCreateOptionsMenu() adds menu items to the toolbar
menu root element, menu resource file, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
MessageFragment, Create MessageFragment
code for, Update the MessageFragment.kt code
Directions classes, Safe Args generates Directions classes
EncryptFragment, MessageFragment needs to pass the message to a
new fragment, MessageFragment needs to pass a message to
EncryptFragment
MessageFragmentDirections class, Safe Args generates Directions classes
methods, creating, Activity Magnets
Modifiers, Compose, Display the header image…, Add padding to the
Column composable
multi-screen apps (see Navigation component)
multiple composables, arranging, Most UIs have multiple composables
MutableLiveData properties, The fragment observes the view model
properties and reacts to changes., Fragments can update GameViewModel’s
properties, GameFragment still includes game logic
MutableLiveData<Type>, GameViewModel and GameFragment need to
use live data
MutableState object, We need to change the value of TemperatureText’s
argument, Let the user enter a temperature, Add a TextField to a
composable function, Reproduce the EditText with a TextField
MVVM (Model-View-ViewModel) architecture, Room is a database library
that sits on top of SQLite, Test Drive, Mixed Messages Solution
My First App, Let’s build a basic app
building, Let’s build a basic app
project, How to build the app
refining (editing), Let’s refine the app
running, How to run the app on a physical device
N
name attribute, You display a fragment in a FragmentContainerView
FragmentContainerView, You display a fragment in a
FragmentContainerView
style, Define styles in style resource files
NavHostFragment, Add a navigation host to the layout using a
FragmentContainerView, Add a NavHostFragment to MainActivity’s layout
navigate() method, navigation controller, Get a navigation controller
navigateToList property, LiveData, EditTaskViewModel will tell
EditTaskFragment when to navigate
navigateToTask property, TasksViewModel, Add a new property to
TasksViewModel, Make TasksFragment navigate to EditTaskFragment
Navigation component, Navigation ui: Going Places
(see also navigation UI)
activity code for, Add a NavHostFragment to activity_main.xml
adding to CatChat project, We’ll use the Navigation component to
navigate to HelpFragment
AppBarConfiguration class, Configure the toolbar using an
AppBarConfiguration
CatChat app exercise, Add dependencies to the app build.gradle file
code for, The updated nav_graph.xml code
Compose Navigation, The Compose Navigation component
fragments, Navigate between screens using the Navigation component,
Use the Navigation component to navigate between fragments
ID attribute, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
navigation controller, Use the Navigation component to navigate
between fragments
findNavController(), Get a navigation controller
fragment navigation, MessageFragment needs to pass a message
to EncryptFragment
linking bottom navigation bar, Link the bottom navigation bar to
the navigation controller
linking navigation drawer, Configure the toolbar’s drawer icon…
onCreate(), Configure the toolbar using an AppBarConfiguration
navigation graph, Use the Navigation component to navigate between
fragments, How navigation should work
creating, Create a navigation graph
EditTaskFragment, Create EditTaskFragment…
EncryptFragment, Add EncryptFragment to the navigation graph
exercises, Navigation Magnets, BE the Safe Args Plug-in
onCreate(), Configure the toolbar using an AppBarConfiguration
pop behavior, Use the navigation graph to pop fragments off the
back stack
SentItemsFragment, Add SentItemsFragment to the Navigation
graph
toolbar, Add the fragments to a navigation graph
XML resources, Navigation graphs are XML resources, We can
delete fragment_result.xml, Delete fragment_game.xml
navigation host, Use the Navigation component to navigate between
fragments
adding to layout, Add a navigation host to the layout using a
FragmentContainerView
adding to MainActivity layout, Display the current fragment in
MainActivity’s layout
FragmentContainerView, Add a navigation host to
activity_main.xml
OnClickListener for WelcomeFragment, Add an OnClickListener to
the button
running app with, What happens when the app runs
updating for Tasks app interactivity, Update the project build.gradle
file…
navigation drawer, Android includes navigation UI components, A
navigation drawer lets you display many navigation items
activity code, The full code for activity_main.xml, The full code for
MainActivity.kt
adding to main activity, How to create a navigation drawer
configuring toolbar icon, Configure the toolbar’s drawer icon…
header, Create the navigation drawer’s header
highlighting selected item, Highlight the selected item with groups
layout, Navigation drawers deconstructed
linking to navigation controller, Configure the toolbar’s drawer icon…
menu items, The drawer gets its items from a menu
replacing bottom navigation bar with, Let’s replace the bottom
navigation bar with a navigation drawer
support section, Add the support section…
navigation UI, Navigation ui: Going Places
(see also recycler view navigation)
activity code, The full code for activity_main.xml, The full code for
MainActivity.kt
bottom navigation bar, Most types of UI navigation work with the
Navigation component
navigation drawer (see navigation drawer)
theme, Create a new project
toolbar (see toolbar)
NavigationView, How to create a navigation drawer
nested layouts, …and a ViewGroup is a type of View, How to add a scroll
view, Nested layouts revisited
NestedScrollView, A nested scroll view makes layout content scrollable
newCelsius, Mutable State object, Add a TextField to a composable
function
NewGameButton composable function, Reproduce the Start New Game
button
newTaskName property, TasksViewModel, We’ll use data binding to insert
a record
notifications, 3. Dialogs and notifications
notifyDataSetChanged() method, TaskItemAdapter, Tell the adapter what
data it should work with, The data property’s setter calls
notifyDataSetChanged()
O
observe() method, MutableLiveData property, The fragment observes the
view model properties and reacts to changes.
observeAsState() function, State object, We’ll display the incorrect guesses
in a Text composable
Observer class, The fragment observes the view model properties and reacts
to changes.
offset property, Chronometer view, The full code for MainActivity.kt
on-click event, A button can listen for on-click events…
onBindViewHolder() method, TaskItemAdapter, Add data to the layout’s
view, A ListAdapter accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback argument
onCleared() method, view model’s overriding of, Test Drive
onClick argument, Button composable, Use a Button composable to add a
button
onClick attribute, adding to button, Use data binding to make a button call a
method when clicked
OnClickListener, A button can listen for on-click events…
adding to Task items, Make each item clickable
floating action button, Add an OnClickListener to the FAB, A toast is a
simple pop-up message
Stopwatch app, The full code for MainActivity.kt
onCreate() method, activity, Get a reference to the button…
activity lifecycle, An activity’s states, The activity lifecycle: from
create to destroy, Your handy guide to the activity lifecycle methods
AppCompatActivity, What the MainActivity code looks like
Bundle, Save the state using onSaveInstanceState()
Navigation component, Configure the toolbar using an
AppBarConfiguration
toolbar, Set the toolbar as MainActivity’s app bar
view binding, How to add view binding to an activity, What the code
does
onCreateOptionsMenu() method, activity, onCreateOptionsMenu() adds
menu items to the toolbar, Respond to menu item clicks with
onOptionsItemSelected(), What happens when the app runs
onCreateView() method, fragments, The fragment’s onCreateView()
method
data binding, 2. Set the layout’s data binding variable
OnClickListener, Add an OnClickListener to the button
overriding, What fragment code looks like
TasksFragment, The full code for fragment_tasks.xml
view model properties, Use the factory to create the view model
with composables, Add composables using Kotlin code, We need to
remove ResultFragment’s views…
onCreateViewHolder() method, TaskItemAdapter, Override the
onCreateViewHolder() method
onDestroy() method, activity lifecycle, An activity’s states, The activity
lifecycle: from create to destroy, Your handy guide to the activity lifecycle
methods
onDestroyView() method, fragments, Fragments can access views from
onCreateView() to onDestroyView()
onOptionsItemSelected() method, activity, Respond to menu item clicks
with onOptionsItemSelected()
onPause() method, activity lifecycle, What if an activity is only partially
visible?, Your handy guide to the activity lifecycle methods
onRestart() method, activity lifecycle, The visible lifecycle, Restart the
stopwatch when the app becomes visible, The updated MainActivity.kt
code, Your handy guide to the activity lifecycle methods
onResume() method, activity lifecycle, What if an activity is only partially
visible?, Your handy guide to the activity lifecycle methods
onSaveInstanceState() method, Save the state using onSaveInstanceState()
activities, Save the state using onSaveInstanceState(), Configuration
changes revisited
fragments, Configuration changes revisited
onStart() method, activity lifecycle, There’s more to an activity’s life than
create and destroy, The visible lifecycle, Restart the stopwatch when the
app becomes visible, Your handy guide to the activity lifecycle methods
onStop() method, activity lifecycle, There’s more to an activity’s life than
create and destroy, The visible lifecycle, We need to implement two more
lifecycle methods, Your handy guide to the activity lifecycle methods
onTaskClicked() method, TasksViewModel, Add a new property to
TasksViewModel, Make TasksFragment navigate to EditTaskFragment
onTaskNavigated() method, TasksViewModel, Add a new property to
TasksViewModel
onValueChange attribute, TextField composable, Let the user enter a
temperature
OrderFragment, The Bits and Pizzas app, Create OrderFragment
adding toolbar, Replace the default app bar with a toolbar
building layout, We need to build OrderFragment’s layout
code for, The full code for fragment_order.xml, The full code for
OrderFragment.kt, The full code for OrderFragment.kt
collapsing toolbar, Let’s create a collapsing toolbar
creating, Create OrderFragment
radio button views to make choices, Choose a pizza type using a radio
button
scrolling toolbar, We’ve added the toolbar…now what?
snackbar, Display the pizza order in a snackbar
toast pop-up to respond to click, Let’s make the FAB respond to clicks
orientation attribute, LinearLayout, A closer look at the layout code
P
package name, Orientation can be vertical or horizontal
packed chain style, constraint layout, There are different styles of chain
padding attribute, LinearLayout, Use padding to add space to the layout’s
edges
padding, applying to composables, Add padding to the Column composable
paddingEnd attribute, LinearLayout, Use padding to add space to the
layout’s edges
paddingStart attribute, LinearLayout, Use padding to add space to the
layout’s edges
paddingVertical attribute, LinearLayout, Use padding to add space to the
layout’s edges
painter argument, Image composable, Display the header image…
parent attribute, style, Define styles in style resource files
paused activity, What if an activity is only partially visible?
pop behavior, navigation graph, Use the navigation graph to pop fragments
off the back stack
pop-up messages, interactive, Material is used throughout Androidville
PreviewMainActivity composable function, You can preview composable
functions, Add a MainActivityContent composable function
private properties, marking, Fragments can update GameViewModel’s
properties
projects, Each screen is a fragment
(see also specific app projects)
adding Google repository reference, Use Gradle to include Jetpack
libraries
creating, How to build the app, Create the project
files in, You’ve created your first Android project, What the code does
properties, The activity code controls the stopwatch
Chronometer, The activity code controls the stopwatch
MutableLiveData, The fragment observes the view model properties
and reacts to changes., Fragments can update GameViewModel’s
properties, GameFragment still includes game logic
protecting view model, Fragments can update GameViewModel’s
properties
view model, GameViewModel and GameFragment need to use live
data
protecting view model properties, Fragments can update
GameViewModel’s properties
publishing apps, 10. Publishing your app
putBoolean() method, Save the current state in a Bundle
putLong method, Save the current state in a Bundle
R
RadioButton, Choose a pizza type using a radio button
RadioGroup, Choose a pizza type using a radio button
recycler view navigation, Recycler View Navigation: Pick a Card
click response, Make each item clickable
navigating to new fragment, We want to use the recycler view to
navigate to a new fragment
updating Task records with EditTaskFragment, We want to use
EditTaskFragment to update task records
recycler views, Recycler Views: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle
(see also recycler view navigation)
adapters, Why use a recycler view?, The adapter adds data to the
recycler view
adding library, Here’s what we’re going to do
card view, Recycler view 2.0
DiffUtil, Tell the recycler view what needs to change
exercise, Adapter Magnets
flexibility of, Recycler views are very flexible
review of process, The recycler view displays task data correctly…
task list display, Tell the recycler view how to display each item…
TasksFragment display, We need to display the recycler view
versus formatted String, Why use a recycler view?
RecyclerView.Adapter, A ListAdapter accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback
argument
releasing apps, 10. Publishing your app
remember, storing variable values in Compose, We need to change the
value of TemperatureText’s argument
res folder, Introducing the key files in your project
resource files, Welcome to Androidville
array resources, Add values to the spinner
folders for types of, Dissecting your new project
image resources (see image resources)
menu resources (see menu resource file)
String resources (see String resources)
resources element, Add and use a new String resource
responding to click (see click response)
result property, data binding approach, ResultFragment updates the text in
its layout, 3. Use the layout’s data binding variable to access the view
model
ResultFragment, How the app will be structured
adding views to, Update ResultFragment’s layout
code for, The updated code for ResultFragment.kt, The full code for
fragment_result.xml, The full code for ResultFragment.kt
composables instead of views, We’ll replace ResultFragment’s views
with composables
creating, The Guessing Game app has two fragments
function in game, Back to the Guessing Game app
in gameOver with live data, GameFragment still includes game logic
linking ResultViewModel to, ResultViewModel needs to hold the
result
removing views, We need to remove ResultFragment’s views…
updating text in layout, ResultFragment updates the text in its layout
view model for, We’ve added a view model for GameFragment
ResultFragmentContent composable function, Add a composable function
for the fragment’s content
ResultText composable function, Reproduce ResultFragment’s TextView
ResultViewModel, Here’s what we’re going to do, We’ve added a view
model for GameFragment
function in game, Back to the Guessing Game app
live data, The full code for GameFragment.kt
resultViewModel property, data binding variable, 1. Add <layout> and
<data> elements
ResultViewModelFactory class, Create the ResultViewModelFactory class
Retrofit, 7. Retrofit
reversed() method, String, EncryptFragment needs to get the argument’s
value
Room persistence library, Room Databases: Room with a View
accessing Task records, Use TaskDao to interact with database records
app setup, Here’s what we’re going to do
database, How Room databases are created
getting records, TasksFragment needs to display records
inserting records, MVVM revisited
SQLite, Room is a database library that sits on top of SQLite
RoomDatabase class, Create a TaskDatabase abstract class
rotation of device, Test Drive
configuration changed by, Test Drive, The game loses state when the
screen rotates
saving activity state for, Save the current state in a Bundle
Row composable, Most UIs have multiple composables, Center the content
of a single Row
Run command, The virtual device gets created
running property, Chronometer view, The full code for MainActivity.kt
S
Safe Args plug-in, MessageFragment needs to pass the message to a new
fragment
Args class, EncryptFragment needs to get the argument’s value
Bits and Pizzas app, Update the project build.gradle file…
Directions class, Safe Args generates Directions classes
exercises, BE the Safe Args Plug-in
Guessing Game app, Update the project build.gradle file…
safe, BE the Safe Args Plug-in Solution
Secret Message app, Add Safe Args to the build.gradle files
saveOffset() method, Chronometer view, The full code for MainActivity.kt
scalable pixels (see sp)
scaleType attribute, FrameLayout, Add an image to your project
scheduling deferrable tasks, 2. WorkManager
screens, Each screen is a fragment
(see also fragments)
choosing best layout for, Android has different types of layout
layouts for (see layouts)
supporting different sizes, Rotating the screen changes the device
configuration, 5. Supporting different screen sizes
scroll value, layout_scrollFlags attribute, Tell the toolbar how to respond to
scroll events
scrolling toolbar, CoordinatorLayout, We’ve added the toolbar…now what?
ScrollView, A scroll view inserts a vertical scrollbar
SDK (see Android SDK (API level))
Secret Message app, Most apps need more than one screen, The Secret
Message app navigates between fragments
back behavior, What if the user wants to go back?
EncryptFragment (see EncryptFragment)
fragments and navigation (see Navigation component)
MessageFragment, Create MessageFragment
Safe Args plug-in, Add Safe Args to the build.gradle files
WelcomeFragment, Add WelcomeFragment to the project
secretWordDisplay property, GameViewModel, GameViewModel and
GameFragment need to use live data, Use the data binding variable to set
the layout’s text
SentItemsFragment, Create SentItemsFragment, Add SentItemsFragment to
the Navigation graph
setAction() method, snackbar, Display the pizza order in a snackbar
setBaseTime() method, Chronometer view, The full code for
MainActivity.kt
setContent() function, What Compose activity code looks like
ComponentActivity, What Compose activity code looks like, Use
composables in composable functions
ComposeView, Add composables using Kotlin code
setContentView() method, activity, What the MainActivity code looks like
binding object, How to add view binding to an activity
converting view to object, Your activity code tells Android which
layout it uses
fragments and navigation, The fragment’s onCreateView() method
overriding, An activity’s states
setOnClickListener() method, activity, Get a reference to the button…,
Make each item clickable, Where should we create the toast?
setSupportActionBar() method, toolbar, Set the toolbar as MainActivity’s
app bar, Fragments don’t have a setSupportActionBar() method
sharing data with other apps, 1. Sharing data with other apps
showAsAction attribute, toolbar, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
SlidingPaneLayout, Use a SlidingPaneLayout
snackbar, popup message, Material is used throughout Androidville, Let’s
make the FAB respond to clicks
actions, Display the pizza order in a snackbar
exercises, Pool Puzzle
sp (scalable pixels), How to define a linear layout
spanCount attribute, GridLayoutManager, The layout manager gallery
Spinner, Let’s update the layout XML, Add values to the spinner, Add the
string-array to strings.xml, Pass a lambda to the setOnClickListener method
Split option, composable preview, Preview composables with the Design or
Split option
spread chain style, constraint layout, There are different styles of chain
spread inside chain style, constraint layout, There are different styles of
chain
SQLite database, Room is a database library that sits on top of SQLite, How
Room databases are created
annotated interface, Use an interface to specify data operations
inserting records, MVVM revisited
tables, We’ll store tasks data in a table, The full code for
TaskDatabase.kt
TaskDatabase abstract class, Create a TaskDatabase abstract class
src attribute, FrameLayout, Add an image to your project
src folder, Introducing the key files in your project
StaggeredGridLayoutManager, The layout manager gallery
start() method, Chronometer view, The activity code controls the stopwatch
startButton property, ActivityMainBinding, Enable view binding in the app
build.gradle file
State objects, composables and live data, We’ll display the incorrect guesses
in a Text composable
stop() method, Chronometer view, The activity code controls the stopwatch
Stopwatch app, The Activity Lifecycle: Being an Activity
(see also activity lifecycle)
Chronometer view, Create a new project
device configuration, Rotating the screen changes the device
configuration
managing state changes, There’s more to an activity’s life than create
and destroy
saving activity state, Save the current state in a Bundle
view binding, Here’s how we’ll use view binding
stopwatch property, Chronometer view, The full code for MainActivity.kt
string element, Add and use a new String resource
String resources, Introducing the key files in your project, Put text in a
String resource file
adding and using, Add and use a new String resource
Compose, Compose projects have no layout files
extracting, Extract the String resource
for GameFragment’s extra text, String resources revisited
random number exercise, Test Drive
Secret Message app, Create a new project
Stopwatch app, Create a new project
strings.xml, Extract the String resource, Add and use a new String
resource
text display exercise, Test Drive
String, formatted versus recycler view, Why use a recycler view?
string-array element, Add values to the spinner
stringResource() function, Text composable, Create an
IncorrectGuessesText composable function
strings.xml file, Extract the String resource, Add and use a new String
resource
style attribute, chip, A chip is a type of flexible compound button
style element, Define styles in style resource files
styles, defining in style resource files, Define styles in style resource files
submenu, creating, Add the support section…
submitList() method, TaskItemAdapter, Populate the ListAdapter’s list…
support section, navigation drawer, Add the support section…
supportsRtl property, AndroidManifest.xml, Orientation can be vertical or
horizontal
Surface composables, Applying themes: revisited
suspend, marking TaskDao’s data access methods with, 1. Mark TaskDao’s
methods with suspend
Switch button, Radio buttons are a type of compound button
system image, specifiying for AVD, Select a system image
SystemClock.elapsedRealtime(), Chronometer view, The activity code
controls the stopwatch
T
table name property, Specify a table name with @Entity
Task data class, We’ll store tasks data in a table
Task records, Use TaskDao to interact with database records
in database, Use TaskDao to interact with database records
layout file, Tell the recycler view how to display each item…
passing to TaskItemAdapter, Populate the ListAdapter’s list…
recycler view, Tell the recycler view how to display each item…
updating with EditTaskFragment, We want to use EditTaskFragment to
update task records
Task type, data binding variable, Add a data binding variable to
task_item.xml, Use the binding class to inflate the layout
TaskDao interface, Use an interface to specify data operations
accessing methods for Task record editing, Use TaskDao to interact
with database records
code for, 1. Mark TaskDao’s methods with suspend
coroutines, Create EditTaskViewModel
get() method, Create EditTaskViewModel
getAll() method, TasksFragment needs to display records,
TasksFragment needs to update TaskItemAdapter’s data property
taskDao property, Add properties for any DAO interfaces
TasksViewModel, MVVM revisited
TasksViewModelFactory, TasksViewModelFactory needs a TaskDao
taskDao property, TaskDatabase, Add properties for any DAO interfaces,
TasksViewModelFactory needs a TaskDao
TaskDatabase abstract class, Create a TaskDatabase abstract class
TaskDiffItemCallback class, Here’s what we’re going to do, We need to
implement DiffUtil.ItemCallback, Populate the ListAdapter’s list…
taskDone property, database column, Specify a table name with @Entity
taskId property, as primary key, Specify a table name with @Entity
TaskItemAdapter, Add data to the layout’s view
adding data to layout view, Add data to the layout’s view
CardView layout update, The adapter’s view holder needs to work
with the new layout code
code for, The full code for TaskItemAdapter.kt, The full code for
TaskItemAdapter.kt, The full code for TaskItemAdapter.kt
connecting to data source, We’ve added a recycler view to
TasksFragment’s layout
creating, The adapter adds data to the recycler view
data type property, Tell the adapter what data it should work with, The
data property’s setter calls notifyDataSetChanged()
extending ListAdapter, A ListAdapter accepts a DiffUtil.ItemCallback
argument
passing of Toast to TaskItemViewHolder via, Where should we create
the toast?
passing Task records to, Populate the ListAdapter’s list…
summary, The adapter code is complete
telling recycler view to use, The full code for fragment_tasks.xml
updating with DiffUtil, Here’s what we’re going to do
view holder, Define the adapter’s view holder
TaskItemBinding class, Add a data binding variable to task_item.xml
TaskItemViewHolder inner class, Define the adapter’s view holder,
Override the onCreateViewHolder() method
bind() method, Add data to the layout’s view
CardView layout update, The adapter’s view holder needs to work
with the new layout code
data binding, Recycler views can use data binding, The layout gets
inflated in the adapter’s view holder code
OnClickListener, Make each item clickable
passing of Toast to, Where should we create the toast?
taskName property, database column, Specify a table name with @Entity,
Add data to the layout’s view
Tasks app, Most apps need to store data, What the Tasks app currently looks
like, The recycler view displays task data correctly…, Recycler views can
be used for navigation
adapters and task list, The adapter adds data to the recycler view
data binding, The layout gets inflated in the adapter’s view holder code
database for, How Room databases are created
DiffUtil, Tell the recycler view what needs to change
getting records, TasksFragment needs to display records
grid of cards, Recycler views are very flexible
inserting records, MVVM revisited
setup, Here’s what we’re going to do
structure, How the app will be structured, How the Tasks app is
currently structured
view models (see view models)
tasks property, TasksViewModel, Use getAll() to get all tasks from the
database, We’ve added a recycler view to TasksFragment’s layout
tasks, scheduling deferrable, 2. WorkManager
TasksFragment, How the app will be structured
activities, Display TasksFragment in MainActivity’s layout…
code for, The full fragment_tasks.xml code, The full TasksFragment.kt
code, The full code for fragment_tasks.xml, The full code for
TasksFragment.kt, The full code for TasksFragment.kt
creating, Create TasksFragment
data binding, Update fragment_tasks.xml, TasksFragment can use data
binding
displaying records, TasksFragment needs to display records
EditTaskFragment navigation, Create EditTaskFragment…, Make
TasksFragment navigate to EditTaskFragment, EditTaskViewModel
will tell EditTaskFragment when to navigate
ListAdapter update, The updated code for TasksFragment.kt
passing Toast code in lambda, Where should we create the toast?
recycler view display, We need to display the recycler view
tasksString property, We’ll bind the tasksString property to the layout’s
text view
TasksViewModel, Create TasksViewModel, TasksViewModel needs a
view model factory
TasksFragmentDirections class, Make TasksFragment navigate to
EditTaskFragment
tasksString property, A LiveData<List<Task>> is a more complex type
TasksViewModel, How the app will be structured, MVVM revisited
connecting tasks list to TaskItemAdapter, We’ve added a recycler view
to TasksFragment’s layout
creating, Create TasksViewModel, TasksViewModel needs a view
model factory
getting tasks, Use getAll() to get all tasks from the database
inserting records, We’ll use data binding to insert a record
launching TaskDao insert() as coroutine, 2. Launch the insert() method
in the background
passing task ID to EditTaskFragment, Add a new property to
TasksViewModel
tasks and tasksString property additions, Let’s update the
TasksViewModel code
TasksViewModelFactory class, TasksViewModel needs a view model
factory
task_item.xml file, The full code for task_item.xml, The full code for
task_item.xml
Temperature Converter app, UI components don’t have to be Views, Let’s
make the app convert temperatures
code for, The full code for MainActivity.kt
creating and configuring project, Create a new Compose project
modifying appearance, We’ll tweak the app’s appearance
TemperatureConverterTheme, Android Studio includes extra theme code
TemperatureText composable function, Let’s display the temperature text
ConvertButton, Use a Button composable to add a button
newCelsius object, Add a TextField to a composable function
updating text displayed, We need to pass a lambda to ConvertButton
updating value of argument, We need to change the value of
TemperatureText’s argument
testing, automated, 4. Automated testing
text attribute, activity_main.xml has a new button
Button, activity_main.xml has a new button, activity_main.xml uses
the String resource
TextView, activity_main.xml has two elements, How to edit a text
view’s text
Text composable, Use a Text composable to display text
for Button, Use a Button composable to add a button
replacing TextView with, We’ll replace ResultFragment’s views with
composables, Add composables using Kotlin code, Reproduce
ResultFragment’s TextView
text variable, TextField composable, Let the user enter a temperature
TextField composable, Let the user enter a temperature
activity code for, The full code for MainActivity.kt
attributes for, Let the user enter a temperature
EnterGuess function, Reproduce the EditText with a TextField
EnterTemperature function, Add a TextField to a composable function
TextView, activity_main.xml has two elements
Chronometer view, The activity code controls the stopwatch
code for, activity_main.xml has two elements, activity_main.xml has a
new button
editing text in, How to edit a text view’s text
LinearLayout, We’ve created a default activity and layout, The
<LinearLayout> element
recycler view adapter, Define the adapter’s view holder
replacing with Text composable, We’ll replace ResultFragment’s views
with composables, Reproduce ResultFragment’s TextView, We’ll
display the incorrect guesses in a Text composable
theme attribute, navigation, Apply a theme in AndroidManifest.xml, The
app bar layout enables toolbar animation
Theme.kt, Android Studio includes extra theme code
themes, Applying themes: revisited
applying to composables, Applying themes: revisited
applying to project, Create a new project
color resource file, Styles can override theme colors
removing default app bar using, Replace the default app bar with a
toolbar
title attribute, menu item, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
toast, popup message, Let’s make the FAB respond to clicks, Where should
we create the toast?
ToggleButton, Radio buttons are a type of compound button
toolbar, Add the toolbar to activity_main.xml
code for, Add the toolbar to activity_main.xml, The full code for
MainActivity.kt
collapsing, Let’s create a collapsing toolbar, You can anchor a FAB to
a collapsing toolbar
creating, Create a new project
navigation drawer icon, Configure the toolbar’s drawer icon…
replacing app bar with, Replace the default app bar with a toolbar,
Replace the default app bar with a toolbar
scrolling, We’ve added the toolbar…now what?
using to navigate, Let’s use the toolbar to navigate
configuring to show Help, We need to configure the toolbar
Help item for, Let’s add a Help item to the menu
HelpFragment, Create HelpFragment
InboxFragment, Create InboxFragment
menu resource file, Specify items in the toolbar with a menu
resource file
navigation graph, Add the fragments to a navigation graph
navigation host, Add a navigation host to activity_main.xml
Transformations.map() method, A LiveData<List<Task>> is a more
complex type
U
unit tests, 4. Automated testing
Up navigation versus Back navigation, We need to configure the toolbar
update() coroutine, TaskDao, Create EditTaskViewModel
update() method, database access, Use @Insert to insert a record
updateScreen() method, GameFragment, What happens when the app runs
updateTask() method, EditTaskViewModel, Create EditTaskViewModel
USB debugging, How to run the app on a physical device
V
val and var, for live data properties, The value property can be null
value attribute, TextField composable, Let the user enter a temperature
value property, MutableLiveData, Live data objects use a value property
as nullable, Live data objects use a value property
making private, Fragments can update GameViewModel’s properties
updating as val not var, The value property can be null
value property, MutableState, We need to change the value of
TemperatureText’s argument
variable element, ResultFragment layout, 1. Add <layout> and <data>
elements
version attribute, @Database annotation, Create a TaskDatabase abstract
class
vertical chain, constraint layout, Test Drive
vertical constraints, Add a vertical constraint too
view binding, View binding to the rescue
activities, The Stopwatch app revisited
code for, The full code for MainActivity.kt, The full code for
OrderFragment.kt
fragments, Fragments can use view binding too (but the code’s a little
different)
Guessing Game app, Update the project build.gradle file…
stopping for code with composables, We need to remove
ResultFragment’s views…
switching off when data binding will do, We can switch off view
binding
versus data binding, Test Drive, Fireside Chats
View class, activity_main.xml has a new button
(see also views)
view holder, recycler view adapter, Define the adapter’s view holder
view model factory, A view model factory creates view models,
TasksViewModel needs a view model factory, EditTaskViewModel needs a
view model factory
view models, View Models: Model Behavior
data binding to get values from, The fragments update the views in
their layouts
EditTaskViewModel, Use TaskDao to interact with database records
exercises, BE the View Model
GameFragment, Add a view model dependency to the app build.gradle
file…
Guessing Game app, What the guessing game will do
live data with, The fragments decide when to update views
reasons for using, Introducing the view model, A view model holds
business logic
ResultFragment, We’ve added a view model for GameFragment
TasksViewModel, MVVM revisited
ViewGroup subclass, All layouts are a type of ViewGroup…
ViewGroup? parameter, The fragment’s onCreateView() method
viewLifecycleOwner argument, The fragment observes the view model
properties and reacts to changes.
ViewModel class, Add a view model dependency to the app build.gradle
file…, Create a GameViewModel object, Test Drive, We’ve added a view
model for GameFragment
ViewModel library, Compose, 6. More Compose features
viewModel property, Create a GameViewModel object, Use the factory to
create the view model, TasksFragment can use data binding
viewModelFactory property, Use the factory to create the view model
ViewModelProvider class, Create a GameViewModel object, A view model
factory creates view models, Create the ResultViewModelFactory class
views, View binding to the rescue
(see also view binding)
aligning, You can align views too, The chain will use three buttons
bottom navigation bar as type of view, A bottom navigation bar is a
type of View
connecting multiple views, Most layouts need multiple views
constraint layout (see constraint layout)
CoordinatorLayout, The coordinator layout coordinates animations
between views
data binding, 1. Add <layout> and <data> elements
editable text, An edit text lets you enter text
findViewById() method, Get a reference to the button…, View
Binding: Bound Together
FrameLayout, A frame layout stacks its views
GameFragment, Update GameFragment’s layout
height, layout-gravity controls the position of a view within a layout
hierarchy of views, Nesting layouts comes at a price
ID, activity_main.xml has a new button
LinearLayout, Let’s build a linear layout, An edit text lets you enter
text, layout-gravity controls the position of a view within a layout
navigation drawer, Navigation drawers deconstructed
NestedScrollView, A nested scroll view makes layout content
scrollable
OrderFragment’s content, Choose a pizza type using a radio button
removing from Guessing Game app, We need to remove
ResultFragment’s views…, Remove views from GameFragment.kt
ResultFragment, Update ResultFragment’s layout
scroll view, A scroll view inserts a vertical scrollbar
toolbar as type of view, A toolbar is a type of View
versus composables, We need to pass a lambda to ConvertButton
W
WebP image format, Add an image to your project
WelcomeFragment, Each screen is a fragment
activity code for, The full code for WelcomeFragment.kt
adding to project, Add WelcomeFragment to the project
back behavior to return to, We could change the back behavior
OnClickListener, Add an OnClickListener to the button
won_lost ID, ResultFragment, ResultFragment updates the text in its layout
won_lost text view, ResultFragment, 3. Use the layout’s data binding
variable to access the view model
WorkManager API, 2. WorkManager